Debates of the Senate (Hansard) 
 Senate Hansard ( of ) Debates the
 ) of Debates Senate the ( Hansard
 of ) Debates the Hansard Senate (
 Debates ( the of Senate ) Hansard
 Debates the ) of Senate Hansard (
 the ) of Hansard Senate ( Debates
 ) the Debates ( of Hansard Senate
 Hansard the Debates ) ( Senate of
 Hansard Senate ( the Debates of )
 ( ) Senate Hansard of the Debates
 ) Debates ( Hansard the Senate of
 the Debates Senate of Hansard ( )
 the Senate of Debates ) Hansard (
 the of ) ( Debates Senate Hansard
 Debates ) the Hansard of Senate (
 Hansard the ( Debates ) Senate of
Let me say at the outset that I was very sceptical, particularly after having read the Quebec resolution which was adopted unanimously in the Quebec Assembly, save for two abstentions, and which was quickly passed by the Quebec assembly requesting the federal government amend section 93 of the Constitution by deleting the subsections in so far as their application pertains to Quebec. 
These sections were incorporated in the British North American Act, 1867. 
The Quebec resolution in its fourth recital gave the Quebec assembly's opinion that the proposed amendment to section 93 requested in no way constituted recognition by the Quebec assembly of the Constitution Act, 1982, which was adopted without its consent.  
Honourable senators, noticing as you must that I am and remain a staunch supporter of the Constitution Act, 1982, this caused me great personal grief and concern.  
The first hurdle I had to overcome was whether or not the wording of the Quebec resolution on its face was so invidious, so egregious and so inconsistent that the recital made it inoperable and, in the process, would defeat its own request to amend the 1867 provisions by the mechanisms of the 1982 Constitution.  
I asked myself how the Province of Quebec could be asking for an amendment to the Constitution contained in the 1867 British North America Act, which was now part of the 1982 Constitution, while recognizing that the only methodology available to Parliament would be via the Constitution Act, 1982.  
Section 43 of the 1982 Constitution contains bilateral amendment processes between the federal government and provinces where their interests are solely engaged. 
Clearly, the only highway, the only path the Government of Quebec or the assembly of Quebec could take to achieve its objective was via the 1982 Constitution.  
Honourable senators, I then examined the federal resolution, which is the one we are being asked to consider. 
The federal resolution differs substantially from the Quebec resolutions. 
They are both appended to the report for your consideration.  
The federal resolution made reference not only to the 1982 Constitution, but to section 23 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedom incorporated in the Constitution Act, 1982.  
I concluded, after listening carefully to legal advice proffered before the committee, that the operative clause of any constitutional resolution was the wording of the amending clause itself. 
While recitals are of interest, while they are opinionated, while they are descriptive, they are not binding.  
Again, it was clear to me that the only way that the federal government could accede to the Quebec assembly's request was by utilizing the 1982 Constitution. 
The Government of Quebec knew this. 
We in Parliament knew this. 
Hence, I and others on the committee insisted that Quebec representatives be invited, despite reports we read in the press to the contrary, that the Quebec representatives would not attend at Ottawa.  
Finally, representatives of the Government of Quebec were invited to attend, which they did, together with members of the opposition. 
They appeared before the committee so that this point and other questions could be addressed.  
 Debates of the Senate ( Hansard
 ) Debates Senate ( of Hansard
 Hansard ( the of Senate )
 ) ( Debates Hansard Senate of
1st Session, 36th Parliament, 
 Session , 1st Parliament 36th ,
 , 1st Session , 36th Parliament
 36th 1st Parliament , Session ,
 Parliament , 1st 36th Session ,
 , 1st Parliament 36th Session ,
 , Parliament 1st Session , 36th
 1st , Session Parliament 36th ,
 Session 1st 36th , Parliament ,
 Parliament 1st , , Session 36th
 1st , Session Parliament 36th ,
 , 1st Parliament 36th , Session
 Session 36th 1st Parliament , ,
 , 36th , 1st Parliament Session
 1st , , 36th Session Parliament
 , 36th , Parliament 1st Session
 , Parliament , 1st Session 36th
Sixth Report of Committee Adopted 
Bill to Amend-First Reading 
Canada Marine Bill 
First Reading 
Aboriginal Peoples 
Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples-Committee Authorized to Study Recommendations 
THE SENATE 
Tuesday, December 9, 1997 
The Senate met at 2:00 p.m., the Speaker in the Chair.  
Prayers.  
Pages Exchange Program with House of Commons 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, before I call for Senators' Statements, I should like to introduce the two pages who are with us this week through the exchange program with the House of Commons.  
They are Anne McCulluch of Calgary, Alberta, who is pursuing studies in journalism at Carleton University.  
Kirk Nangreaves of Saint-Hubert, Quebec, is studying at the University of Ottawa Arts Faculty.  
He is majoring in psychology.  
On behalf of all senators and the Senate, I bid you welcome.  
SENATORS' STATEMENTS 
The Senate 
Response to Newspaper Article on Senator's Residency Qualifications 
 Session , 36th Parliament ,
 Parliament Session , 36th ,
 Session 1st Parliament , ,
 , Session , 36th Parliament
Volume 137, Issue 1 
 1 137 Issue , Volume
 Volume 1 137 Issue ,
 1 , Volume 137 Issue
 , Issue Volume 1 137
 , Volume 137 Issue 1
 Issue , Volume 1 137
 , Volume 1 Issue 137
 137 Issue Volume , 1
 Issue 1 Volume 137 ,
 137 Volume 1 Issue ,
 Issue , 1 137 Volume
 Issue 1 137 Volume ,
 1 137 Issue Volume ,
 1 Volume 137 , Issue
 137 , 1 Volume Issue
 , 1 Issue Volume 137
We are well aware of the Liberal record. 
We resent the fact that this bill will not be given full Senate scrutiny. 
We also know what will happen when things go wrong with this bill, as they will. 
I outlined the government's record on making promises. 
We know its record on responsibility. 
I can just see it. 
When this bill is in shambles, Paul Martin will be 95. 
Jean Chrétien will be 95 or 96 or 102.  
Senator Taylor :
They will still be in power.  
Senator Tkachuk :
He will not take responsibilities. 
The Grits will never take responsibility for their actions, as they did not when they cancelled the Somalia inquiry, and when they made false accusations against a former prime minister. 
I don't know who, but I'm not responsible."  
There was not an iota of evidence to prove that what they were saying was correct. 
They did not take any responsibility after cancelling the EH-101 contract. 
They are still talking about it in cabinet. 
Nor did they take any responsibility after their failed strategy in job creation. 
Nor did they take responsibility after almost losing the country in the Quebec referendum. 
"Trust us," they say. 
 Volume 137 , 1
 , Issue 137 1
 Issue , 137 Volume
 Issue 137 Volume 1
Monday, September 22, 1997 
 22 , September , Monday 1997
 Monday 1997 September , 22 ,
 , 22 September , 1997 Monday
 Monday , 22 September 1997 ,
 , September Monday , 22 1997
 Monday September 1997 22 , ,
 September , Monday , 1997 22
 , Monday , 1997 22 September
 , September 22 1997 , Monday
 , 1997 September 22 Monday ,
 September , , 22 1997 Monday
 Monday 1997 22 September , ,
 Monday , 22 September 1997 ,
 Monday 1997 22 September , ,
 , 22 1997 , Monday September
 September , , 1997 Monday 22
I will bring forward an answer for my honourable friend.  
Senator Forrestall :
Was there any criticism from our NATO allies with respect to the grounding of these aircraft? 
My understanding is that these aircraft are at sea, and a number of them are engaged in some training exercises. 
Were we criticized for not being able to live up to our obligations?  
Senator Graham :
Not to my knowledge. 
It is my understanding that those helicopters are at sea on exercises. 
As to precisely where they are, on whatever ocean, I cannot positively say. 
It might be a military secret, as a matter of fact.  
Federal-Provincial Relations 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Atlantic Provinces Equal to Increase in Social Transfers-Government Position 
Hon. Brenda M. Robertson :
Honourable senators, I have a supplementary that goes back to questions raised by the Honourable Senator DeWare. 
I will come back to this again tomorrow and the next day.  
I should like to know from the Leader of the Government in the Senate whether the cuts we discussed yesterday in the social transfer payments for Atlantic Canada represent the increases in the social transfers that were announced twice previously by this government? 
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
No, not that I am aware, but it is an interesting question. 
I will bring forth an answer.  
Delayed Answers to Oral Questions 
 Monday September 22 , 1997
 September , 1997 Monday ,
 , 1997 22 September ,
 , 22 September 1997 Monday
The Honourable Gildas L. Molgat, Speaker 
 Speaker Molgat . L Honourable The Gildas ,
 The . Speaker Honourable L , Gildas Molgat
 Speaker The Molgat Honourable L . Gildas ,
 Gildas Molgat . L Honourable Speaker , The
 Speaker , The . Honourable L Molgat Gildas
 Molgat Gildas L The Honourable , Speaker .
 Gildas Molgat The Speaker , L . Honourable
 L Gildas Speaker Molgat , . Honourable The
 . Gildas The L Honourable Speaker , Molgat
 Speaker Honourable Gildas The Molgat . , L
 Honourable . Gildas The Molgat L , Speaker
 , Molgat L The Gildas Honourable . Speaker
 L Honourable . , Molgat The Speaker Gildas
 L Speaker Molgat , Gildas Honourable The .
 Speaker The . L Honourable Gildas , Molgat
 Gildas Speaker Molgat Honourable The . , L
Remember, they have a tax plan with a flat tax. 
With the flat tax, you reduce the amount of exemptions. 
We are not getting any ideas from them.  
Now I will turn to the Liberals.  
Senator Gigantès :
Be careful.  
Senator Tkachuk :
Since taking office, they have taken $300 million in new taxes from senior citizens by income-testing the age credit. 
They want Canadians to mature their RRSPs by the year they turn 69 rather than the previous age limit of 71. 
However, seniors do not know about it, and this will be another huge tax grab - Merry Christmas, Canada - by the Liberal Government and Paul Martin. 
Twice they have killed plans to increase the RRSP contribution limits so that people could put money away for their future given that the government will not provide for them.  
The Canadian Association of Retired Persons says that as many as 80,000 Canadians may fail to convert their RRSPs on time. 
Where are the big advertising programs of the Government of Canada which they mount when they really want to advertise something? 
This is a government program they do not want to advertise. 
They want it to slip in, just like this bill, so that people will not know and will not make the proper financial decisions, but instead will be exposed to a huge tax load for the year 1997. 
That is what Paul Martin wants, so that in February he can brag in his budget speech about how he has cleaned up the deficit - on the backs of the unemployed, on the backs of senior citizens, and on the backs of young people who will be paying the $400 million to the new pension plan.  
Senator Gigantès :
That is because over nine years you did nothing to address the deficit.  
Senator Tkachuk :
That is not true.  
 The Honourable L . Molgat , Speaker
 Molgat Gildas . L The Honourable Speaker
 Honourable L Speaker Molgat . Gildas The
 , Molgat . Gildas L The Speaker
Table of Contents 
 Table of Contents
 Contents Table of
 of Table Contents
 Contents Table of
 of Table Contents
 Table of Contents
 of Contents Table
 Contents of Table
 Table of Contents
 Contents Table of
 of Table Contents
 Table of Contents
 of Table Contents
 Contents of Table
 Contents Table of
 of Contents Table
Senator Spivak :
I am glad to hear that.  
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Concept of Differing Targets-Government Position 
Hon. Mira Spivak :
In the current discussions in Kyoto, the idea of tailoring reductions targets to individual countries' economic and social profiles rather than having a one-size-fits-all commitment has gained some currency, particularly in view of the most recent American proposal. 
Where does the Canadian delegation stand with respect to this concept?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government):
Honourable senators, the media is reporting, of course, on a possible deal on targets and time-tables which could see Canada accepting a reduction of 5 per cent from 1990 levels bythe year 2010. 
At this point, these reports are speculative, but negotiations are ongoing.  
National Unity 
Recent Remarks of Prime Minister-Possible Conditions of Secession of Quebec-Government Position 
Hon. Pierre Claude Nolin :
Honourable senators, I would like to return to the matter of the Prime Minister's statement last weekend on Quebec's secession. 
He said in fact last week in Quebec City that he would be prepared to negotiate Quebec's separation, if certain conditions were met.  
I would first like to know what conditions the Prime Minister was referring to?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, the Government of Canada has always said that Quebecers would not be kept within Canada against their will. 
That being said, breaking up a country is not a step that one would take lightly. 
Senator Graham :
The will of Quebecers to leave must be clearly expressed. 
 of Contents
 Contents Table
 of Table
 of Contents
THIRTY-SIXTH PARLIAMENT OPENING OF FIRST SESSION 
 SIXTH THIRTY FIRST OPENING OF - SESSION PARLIAMENT
 PARLIAMENT FIRST SIXTH OF - SESSION OPENING THIRTY
 OF SIXTH THIRTY - OPENING PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION
 SESSION THIRTY - FIRST OPENING OF PARLIAMENT SIXTH
 PARLIAMENT SIXTH OPENING THIRTY FIRST - OF SESSION
 - SESSION OF SIXTH OPENING FIRST PARLIAMENT THIRTY
 OF SESSION OPENING FIRST - PARLIAMENT SIXTH THIRTY
 - SIXTH OPENING OF FIRST SESSION THIRTY PARLIAMENT
 FIRST OPENING - PARLIAMENT SIXTH OF THIRTY SESSION
 OPENING FIRST - THIRTY OF PARLIAMENT SESSION SIXTH
 OPENING FIRST OF - THIRTY SESSION PARLIAMENT SIXTH
 PARLIAMENT SIXTH SESSION THIRTY OPENING - FIRST OF
 - FIRST OPENING SIXTH THIRTY OF PARLIAMENT SESSION
 OPENING - FIRST PARLIAMENT SESSION SIXTH THIRTY OF
 OF PARLIAMENT OPENING SESSION SIXTH - THIRTY FIRST
 OF OPENING FIRST THIRTY SESSION PARLIAMENT - SIXTH
This is what we have always said.  
Bear in mind that this minister is a separatist. 
I repeat what he said: 
This is what we have always said.  
Mr. Chrétien has acknowledged that the federal government would negotiate. 
Could the Leader of the Government in the Senate tell us under what authority the Prime Minister could negotiate?  
Senator Graham :
The Prime Minister would be negotiating on behalf of Canadians, but recognizing at the same time that nine other provinces and the territories are involved. 
I am sure the Prime Minister would take all of that into consideration.  
Senator Nolin :
The Supreme Court received the request from your government to decide on the issue of Quebec's secession. 
We will learn in all likelihood from the Supreme Court that the amending formula would be appropriate if Canadians agreed to allow one province to separate from the others. 
Have the Prime Minister, the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs or officials of your government had formal or informal discussions on this matter with the representatives of the nine other provinces?  
Senator Graham :
Not that I am aware, honourable senators. 
We are aware, of course, of the meetings that took place with the premiers in Calgary. 
We know there is a first ministers' conference later this week in Ottawa, at which this matter may or may not arise. 
However, I am not aware that there have been discussions, either formal or informal, between the Prime Minister and the premiers up to this point in time.  
Immigration 
Tracking and Detention of Unsuccessful Refugee Claimants-Government Position 
 THIRTY SIXTH PARLIAMENT OPENING OF FIRST SESSION
 FIRST THIRTY SIXTH OPENING SESSION - OF
 - PARLIAMENT SIXTH OPENING FIRST SESSION THIRTY
 PARLIAMENT OPENING THIRTY SIXTH - FIRST OF
COMMUNICATION FROM GOVERNMENT HOUSE 
 GOVERNMENT FROM HOUSE COMMUNICATION
 GOVERNMENT HOUSE FROM COMMUNICATION
 HOUSE FROM GOVERNMENT COMMUNICATION
 COMMUNICATION FROM GOVERNMENT HOUSE
 COMMUNICATION FROM GOVERNMENT HOUSE
 HOUSE FROM GOVERNMENT COMMUNICATION
 COMMUNICATION FROM HOUSE GOVERNMENT
 HOUSE FROM GOVERNMENT COMMUNICATION
 HOUSE COMMUNICATION GOVERNMENT FROM
 FROM HOUSE GOVERNMENT COMMUNICATION
 COMMUNICATION FROM GOVERNMENT HOUSE
 GOVERNMENT HOUSE FROM COMMUNICATION
 FROM COMMUNICATION GOVERNMENT HOUSE
 COMMUNICATION FROM GOVERNMENT HOUSE
 FROM HOUSE COMMUNICATION GOVERNMENT
 HOUSE FROM GOVERNMENT COMMUNICATION
This is in keeping with Elections Canada's 1993 mandate to educate voters about the democratic right to vote.  
While this book will appeal to historians, political scientists, university and high school teachers and students, it is hoped that it will also reach those who may have difficulty exercising their right to vote.  
As parliamentarians, honourable senators, it is our role to help promote this book and educate our fellow citizens on their rights as voters.  
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
Report of Committee 
Hon. Ron Ghitter , Chair of the Standing Senate Committee on Energy, the Environment and Natural Resources, presented the following report: 
Tuesday, December 9, 1997 
The Standing Senate Committee on Energy, the Environment and Natural Resources has the honour to present its 
SECOND REPORT 
Respectfully submitted, 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this bill be read the third time?  
On motion of Senator Butts, bill placed on the Orders of the Day for third reading at the next sitting of the Senate.  
Income Tax Conventions Implementation Act, 1997 
Report of Committee 
Hon. Michael Kirby , Chairman of the Standing Senate Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce, presented the following report: 
Tuesday, December 9, 1997 
The Standing Senate Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce has the honour to present its 
SIXTH REPORT 
Your Committee, to which was referred the Bill C-10, Act to implement a convention between Canada and Sweden, a convention between Canada and the Republic of Kazakhstan, a convention between Canada and the Republic of Iceland and a convention between Canada and the Kingdom of Denmark for the avoidance of double taxation and the prevention of fiscal evasion with respect to taxes on income and to amend the Canada-Netherlands Income Tax Convention Act, 1986 and the Canada-United States Tax Convention Act, 1984, has examined the said Bill in obedience to its Order of Reference dated December 8, 1997, and now reports the same without amendment.  
 COMMUNICATION GOVERNMENT HOUSE
 GOVERNMENT COMMUNICATION HOUSE
 FROM GOVERNMENT HOUSE
 FROM HOUSE COMMUNICATION
COMMUNICATION FROM GOVERNMENT HOUSE 
 HOUSE COMMUNICATION GOVERNMENT FROM
 GOVERNMENT FROM COMMUNICATION HOUSE
 FROM GOVERNMENT COMMUNICATION HOUSE
 FROM HOUSE COMMUNICATION GOVERNMENT
 GOVERNMENT HOUSE COMMUNICATION FROM
 FROM GOVERNMENT HOUSE COMMUNICATION
 COMMUNICATION GOVERNMENT HOUSE FROM
 HOUSE GOVERNMENT COMMUNICATION FROM
 GOVERNMENT HOUSE FROM COMMUNICATION
 COMMUNICATION FROM GOVERNMENT HOUSE
 GOVERNMENT HOUSE FROM COMMUNICATION
 GOVERNMENT HOUSE FROM COMMUNICATION
 FROM HOUSE COMMUNICATION GOVERNMENT
 COMMUNICATION HOUSE FROM GOVERNMENT
 COMMUNICATION FROM HOUSE GOVERNMENT
 GOVERNMENT FROM HOUSE COMMUNICATION
Senator Graham :
Not that I am aware, honourable senators. 
We are aware, of course, of the meetings that took place with the premiers in Calgary. 
We know there is a first ministers' conference later this week in Ottawa, at which this matter may or may not arise. 
However, I am not aware that there have been discussions, either formal or informal, between the Prime Minister and the premiers up to this point in time.  
Immigration 
Tracking and Detention of Unsuccessful Refugee Claimants-Government Position 
Hon. Donald H. Oliver :
Honourable senators, my question to the Leader of the Government in the Senate is a continuation of the line of questions I had for the honourable leader yesterday. 
Will the Leader of the Government tell this chamber what plans are being considered to detain those who are dangerous, or who are judged to be unlikely to depart of their own free will? 
Where will they be detained, and under what controls to ensure that Canadians are protected?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, I take my honourable friend's question seriously, as I did the questions he put yesterday. 
I am still attempting to obtain clarification for him on this matter as soon as possible.  
Detention Facilities for Refugee Claimants-Request for Particulars 
Hon. Donald H. Oliver :
As the honourable leader knows, the Department of Immigration maintains detention facilities across the country. 
Can he tell us how many refugee claimants are presently in detention, the number of centres, and the annual cost to Canadians to maintain these centres?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Fisheries and Oceans 
 COMMUNICATION FROM GOVERNMENT
 GOVERNMENT COMMUNICATION FROM
 FROM GOVERNMENT HOUSE
 HOUSE FROM GOVERNMENT
Adjournment 
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
That is fine, if the government wants to do that. 
Now you have two guys living together; one dies, the other one is picking up some cash. 
That costs more money. 
Well, two guys who live together for one year may not be gay. 
How would you know?  
Senator Gigantès :
You want surveillance cameras?  
Senator Tkachuk :
So there is an opportunity for fraud. 
This is not a pension program. 
Let us make that clear. 
This is a payroll tax to pay Old Age Pensions, disability, life insurance, benefits to survivors, orphans, children, or exemptions for child rearing. 
We did not have that either, and there is nothing wrong with that. 
They decided that seven years of child rearing would make you part of the CPP labour force, and therefore you can get benefits. 
That is a social program; a good social program, but it is coming out of the pension fund.  
We have spent all this cash over the last 30 years and we say now, "Oh, it is not our fault. 
It is not legislators' fault. 
Senator Gigantès :
Are you quoting the Reform Party?  
Senator Tkachuk :




Debates of the Senate (Hansard) 
 ) Debates Hansard the ( of Senate
 Debates Senate ) the of ( Hansard
 of Senate Hansard ( ) Debates the
 ) of Senate ( Hansard Debates the
 the of ) Debates Senate Hansard (
 the Hansard of Senate ( Debates )
 ( ) of the Debates Senate Hansard
 of Hansard Senate the ) ( Debates
 ( ) Hansard the Debates Senate of
 ( Debates the Senate of ) Hansard
 of Senate the ( ) Hansard Debates
 ) Debates ( Senate of the Hansard
 Senate of ) Hansard the Debates (
 the Hansard ( of Debates ) Senate
 Hansard ) Debates Senate of ( the
 of Hansard Senate ) the ( Debates
During the weeks that followed, I continued to try to overcome Quebec's objections, to the extent of modifying the principle of minority language education and agreeing to fiscal compensation when Quebec opted out of amendments that affected culture and education. 
That required a hell of a lot of selling to Trudeau, but he went along in the end, as did the nine other premiers, who were willing to reopen their sealed bargain in order to bring in Quebec. 
Mr. Chrétien goes on to say: 
I used to joke that these were the first constitutional amendments in history to have been negotiated over the telephone.  
Let it be noted that Mr. Chrétien takes pride of authorship - "of modifying the principle of minority education...". 
He boasts of getting the agreement of then Prime Minister Trudeau and the nine other premiers, and finds it amusing that this inexcusable abandonment of a fundamental principle was secured over the telephone.  
Honourable senators, Quebec's partial exemption from section 23 was initiated and approved by Mr. Chrétien by including the following in the Constitution Act, 1982: 
59(1) Paragraph 23(1)( a ) shall come into force in respect of Quebec on a day to be fixed by proclamation issued by the Queen or the Governor General under the Great Seal of Canada.  
(2) A proclamation under subsection (1) shall be issued only where authorized by the legislative assembly or government of Quebec. 
Section 23(1)( a ), from which Quebec is exempted by the authors of the Constitution Act themselves, requires that Canadian citizens: 
Finally, I want to comment on the notion of joint committees, particularly those charged with studying a particular item within a given period. 
It was said here, and repeated before the committee, that participation by the Senate must not be interpreted as an abandonment by it of the obligations imposed on the Senate in matters of constitutional amendments. 
It is true that, alone, we cannot defeat an amendment of this nature, as the Senate may be overruled by the House of Commons. 
However, as was shown in the case of the first Term 17 resolution, although the Senate impact on a constitutional amendment is limited, its efforts in this regard can be most constructive. 
I am convinced that if the amendments to it, which the Senate forwarded to the House, had been accepted, Parliament would not be faced with a second Term 17 resolution as it is now, as the Senate amendments satisfied the affected minorities while respecting the Government of Newfoundland's objectives.  
The joint committee was not given enough time to review the Quebec resolution with the care it deserved. 
Witnesses were impressive in numbers, but time restrictions affected their presentations, and questions and answers were too often incomplete when they were not cut short. 
Joint committees of this sort benefit the government, not Parliament, as they are limited in both latitude and independence by the government's control over their agenda. 
This is not meant as a reflection on the work done by the co-chairmen or those who participated on the committee, who I again thank for their excellent work, in particular the co-chairmen, for they toiled under difficult circumstances. 
It is a comment on the concept itself and one, I gather, which can also be applied to the joint committee which has just completed its study of the proposed amendment to Term 17.  
 Debates of the Senate ( Hansard
 of Senate the Hansard ( )
 Senate ) Debates the ( Hansard
 the of ) ( Debates Hansard
Monday, September 22, 1997 
 September , 1997 , 22 Monday
 , 22 September 1997 , Monday
 Monday September , 1997 22 ,
 22 , 1997 Monday September ,
 , , 1997 Monday September 22
 Monday , , 22 September 1997
 22 1997 September Monday , ,
 September 22 Monday 1997 , ,
 1997 22 , , Monday September
 1997 September , 22 Monday ,
 Monday , , 1997 22 September
 , 22 1997 September , Monday
 1997 22 September Monday , ,
 22 , 1997 Monday September ,
 1997 September Monday , , 22
 1997 , September 22 Monday ,
The Hon. the Speaker :
Your 15 minutes are up. 
Is leave granted to continue, honourable senators?  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
Senator Bolduc :
Honourable senators, clearly, we will be increasing the cost of jobs for businesses, and the cost of work for individuals. 
How can another payroll tax be positive for the creation of jobs? 
I would like an answer to this good question.  
Another question concerns the interprovincial competition that can be expected. 
It is obvious that the provinces which used to benefit from preferential rates from the federal fund will pay the going price in future. 
They will borrow, but at a higher rate. 
The increase in debt servicing costs will inflate each province's budget.  
As far as business investment is concerned, will the populations of the provinces agree to have their savings used for businesses in other provinces at the expense of their own? 
Will the provincial governments be tempted to influence the investment board to serve their interests? 
A moment ago I said that when a government agency, a public office, is created, there is a risk of politicizing the process.  
Participation in business, with such enormous amounts, cannot be limited to a few major companies - the Canadian market is not all that big - but will also extend to a multitude of medium-sized businesses. 
The available funding will be sufficient to invest in hundreds of medium-sized businesses. 
In Quebec, for example, if I remember correctly from its last report, the Caisse de dépôt already invests in almost 800 Quebec businesses.  
Now, how are these 800 to be selected and monitored? 
 Monday September 22 , 1997
 , Monday 22 September 1997
 22 September 1997 Monday ,
 1997 , 22 Monday ,
THIRTY-SIXTH PARLIAMENT OPENING OF FIRST SESSION 
 SIXTH OPENING OF FIRST PARLIAMENT SESSION - THIRTY
 OPENING THIRTY SIXTH - PARLIAMENT OF SESSION FIRST
 OF THIRTY FIRST OPENING PARLIAMENT SESSION SIXTH -
 OPENING OF FIRST SIXTH - THIRTY PARLIAMENT SESSION
 PARLIAMENT OPENING FIRST THIRTY SESSION SIXTH OF -
 SESSION PARLIAMENT SIXTH OPENING THIRTY - OF FIRST
 - SIXTH THIRTY SESSION OPENING FIRST PARLIAMENT OF
 PARLIAMENT THIRTY OPENING SIXTH - FIRST OF SESSION
 OPENING THIRTY SESSION SIXTH FIRST OF - PARLIAMENT
 OF OPENING FIRST PARLIAMENT - SESSION THIRTY SIXTH
 OPENING FIRST PARLIAMENT SIXTH THIRTY SESSION - OF
 FIRST THIRTY SESSION - OPENING OF PARLIAMENT SIXTH
 FIRST SESSION THIRTY SIXTH - OPENING OF PARLIAMENT
 OF SIXTH OPENING - SESSION THIRTY FIRST PARLIAMENT
 SIXTH THIRTY SESSION OF PARLIAMENT - OPENING FIRST
 FIRST PARLIAMENT - OPENING OF SESSION SIXTH THIRTY
To paraphrase Laurier from 100 years ago, the 21st century will indeed belong to Canada.  
Hon. Therese Lavoie-Roux :
I should like to ask Senator Grafstein how he can affirm - perhaps we were not attending the same meeting - that Alliance Québec was in favour of the abolition of section 93?  
They were, as were most people, in favour of linguistic boards, but when it came to the abrogation of section 93, not only were they not in accord with that when they appeared before our committee, they even wrote to us to reconfirm their disagreement with the abrogation of section 93. 
However, Senator Grafstein has said that both the French-speaking Protestants and the English-speaking Catholics were certainly not in agreement, although they were in agreement with linguistic boards.  
It is not only the minority of the majority, in terms of the French-speaking Protestants, but also Alliance Québec that was in disagreement with this.  
I should like to raise many other points but, in view of the time, I will stop there.  
Senator Grafstein :
Honourable senators, I would refer my colleague to the transcript. 
Read the transcript. 
If there is a dispute about evidence, rather than taking my word or that of the honourable senator opposite - with whom I do disagree - senators should read the transcript. 
The transcript will speak for itself.  
Senator Lavoie-Roux :
I think all senators would have wanted to read the transcript, but we did not have enough time.  
The minister appeared before the committee on November 4. I asked him if he felt that minorities would be as well protected by section 23 of the Charter as they were by section 93 of the Constitution, and he said that they would not be as well protected.  
Senator Grafstein :
He and I have a different viewpoint on section 23(1)( a ) of the Charter.  
Hon. Dalia Wood :
Honourable senators, I have a question for the honourable senator.  
I do not agree with the concept of my honourable friend's consensus. 
 THIRTY SIXTH PARLIAMENT OPENING OF FIRST SESSION
 FIRST SESSION THIRTY OF - SIXTH PARLIAMENT
 FIRST THIRTY SESSION OPENING PARLIAMENT SIXTH -
 OF SESSION FIRST OPENING PARLIAMENT SIXTH -
Parliament having been summoned by Proclamation to meet this day for the dispatch of business: 
 to for the meet : dispatch business by Proclamation been of summoned having day Parliament this
 dispatch day summoned meet Parliament : for by been business to having Proclamation of this the
 dispatch been business Parliament summoned : day of having to the this meet for by Proclamation
 summoned been meet Parliament the : day Proclamation to by for of business this dispatch having
 summoned Proclamation by for day been Parliament dispatch this to having business the of meet :
 for been of by Parliament having this to business summoned Proclamation day meet the dispatch :
 the summoned been of to by business having dispatch this day : Parliament for meet Proclamation
 having : of been Parliament summoned meet by day the business for dispatch this to Proclamation
 by been having Parliament day dispatch Proclamation to business summoned this for the : of meet
 of for Parliament by dispatch the day : to this having business been Proclamation meet summoned
 business Proclamation been summoned dispatch for by having Parliament to this : day meet of the
 business of dispatch the for this having meet been : Parliament Proclamation to day summoned by
 Parliament for the dispatch by to day summoned business this meet having : Proclamation been of
 been for business dispatch by to Proclamation this having summoned of the day Parliament meet :
 for meet this having summoned Proclamation dispatch business : Parliament been by of day to the
 Proclamation this meet business the dispatch of to having : summoned Parliament been for day by
Senate committees are less partisan, more thorough and more careful. 
Joint committees are a compromise, but I am confident that the Senate's practice of care and attention was, for the most part, adopted in the work of the special joint committee on the Quebec school question.  
It is true, as senators have pointed out, that the special joint committee was given a short time-frame to make its recommendations. 
However, committee members were assiduous in assuring all points of view were heard, unlike the Government of Quebec which chose not to have public hearings. 
This made our task doubly difficult.  
As senators, we are unlike any other evidence-gathering body. 
We gather evidence, we serve as our own advisors, seek our own counsel, we become judges, and we become the jury. 
We are the supreme court of the land when it comes to legislation. 
We must view the evidence before committees with care. 
I urge all senators, before they vote, to carefully review the full transcript of the evidence.  
Let me say at the outset that I was very sceptical, particularly after having read the Quebec resolution which was adopted unanimously in the Quebec Assembly, save for two abstentions, and which was quickly passed by the Quebec assembly requesting the federal government amend section 93 of the Constitution by deleting the subsections in so far as their application pertains to Quebec. 
These sections were incorporated in the British North American Act, 1867. 
The Quebec resolution in its fourth recital gave the Quebec assembly's opinion that the proposed amendment to section 93 requested in no way constituted recognition by the Quebec assembly of the Constitution Act, 1982, which was adopted without its consent.  
Honourable senators, noticing as you must that I am and remain a staunch supporter of the Constitution Act, 1982, this caused me great personal grief and concern.  
The first hurdle I had to overcome was whether or not the wording of the Quebec resolution on its face was so invidious, so egregious and so inconsistent that the recital made it inoperable and, in the process, would defeat its own request to amend the 1867 provisions by the mechanisms of the 1982 Constitution.  
I asked myself how the Province of Quebec could be asking for an amendment to the Constitution contained in the 1867 British North America Act, which was now part of the 1982 Constitution, while recognizing that the only methodology available to Parliament would be via the Constitution Act, 1982.  
Section 43 of the 1982 Constitution contains bilateral amendment processes between the federal government and provinces where their interests are solely engaged. 
Clearly, the only highway, the only path the Government of Quebec or the assembly of Quebec could take to achieve its objective was via the 1982 Constitution.  
Honourable senators, I then examined the federal resolution, which is the one we are being asked to consider. 
The federal resolution differs substantially from the Quebec resolutions. 
 Parliament having been summoned by Proclamation to meet this day for dispatch of business :
 having summoned business the meet by dispatch been of Proclamation to Parliament day this for
 business having : dispatch Proclamation summoned Parliament of the by for to day this meet
 of day to for Parliament summoned having business by been : meet dispatch this Proclamation
The Senate met at 10:30 a.m. 
 Senate The m a 10 at . 30 met : .
 10 a m . The 30 : met at Senate .
 30 10 Senate . The . : m at a met
 : at . . met a Senate The m 30 10
 : met . 30 . m Senate The a 10 at
 : . The 30 at Senate met m a 10 .
 . a 10 : . met 30 at m Senate The
 The m a 30 10 Senate : . met at .
 met 10 a . : m The Senate 30 . at
 . at The a : 30 met Senate . 10 m
 30 10 met at a The . m Senate . :
 The at 30 : Senate a . m met . 10
 met . at 10 m : . a 30 Senate The
 . . Senate at 10 m : The 30 a met
 . : a met The . 30 at 10 m Senate
 at 30 Senate . m : met . a 10 The
If the deputy leader could guarantee to us that, on Wednesdays from now on - and we will strive to be cooperative - we will sit no later than 3:30 p.m., unless there is a proven urgency, then I think Senator Stewart's motion is in order. 
However, we need that assurance first.  
Senator Carstairs :
Let me assure the Leader and Deputy Leader of the Opposition that we will do everything on our part to ensure that sessions end on time. 
We did sit yesterday, which was a Monday. 
I can assure senators we will be sitting next Monday in order to fulfil the business of the chamber before the Christmas break.  
Senator Kinsella :
On that basis, I do not think leave is necessary.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is leave granted?  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
He just felt it was not necessary.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Leave is granted.  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is it your pleasure, honourable senators, to adopt the motion?  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
 The Senate met at 10 : 30 . m .
 Senate at 30 The . : a 10 met m
 . 10 m : a met The at 30 .
 The Senate . a : m at 30 . 10
COMMUNICATION FROM GOVERNMENT HOUSE 
 FROM COMMUNICATION GOVERNMENT HOUSE
 HOUSE COMMUNICATION FROM GOVERNMENT
 COMMUNICATION FROM GOVERNMENT HOUSE
 GOVERNMENT COMMUNICATION FROM HOUSE
 COMMUNICATION FROM GOVERNMENT HOUSE
 FROM GOVERNMENT HOUSE COMMUNICATION
 HOUSE COMMUNICATION FROM GOVERNMENT
 COMMUNICATION FROM GOVERNMENT HOUSE
 HOUSE FROM GOVERNMENT COMMUNICATION
 HOUSE COMMUNICATION FROM GOVERNMENT
 GOVERNMENT COMMUNICATION HOUSE FROM
 FROM GOVERNMENT HOUSE COMMUNICATION
 HOUSE GOVERNMENT COMMUNICATION FROM
 COMMUNICATION FROM GOVERNMENT HOUSE
 COMMUNICATION HOUSE FROM GOVERNMENT
 GOVERNMENT FROM COMMUNICATION HOUSE
Again, honourable senators, this is a question of evidence. 
I refer all senators to the transcript.  
I wish to speak specifically about the fact that we are dealing with elites as opposed to the groups they represent. 
We questioned these representatives during the hearings as to whether their underlying groups agreed with the position they had taken.  
On the Catholic side, we had the position of the archbishops, as limited as it was. 
We had Catholic school boards and Catholic teachers. 
I remember specifically cross-examining Catholic teachers and asking whether they had discussions with students and their parents respecting the changes. 
Their view was that they represented the broad consensus of parents and students as it applied to this amendment. 
All parents wanted a change to renovate the school system, and this was the best modality in which to do that.  
I agree with Senator Lynch-Staunton, Senator Wood and Senator Lavoie-Roux that this is not perfect. 
However, in addition to the evidence, we did refer to opinion polls that seemed to suggest a strong support for reform along these lines.  
Yes, the resolution is imperfect. 
We would like to have done it "our way," as Frank Sinatra used to say, but we must deal with the Province of Quebec in this case. 
We had to bend imperfect tools to see whether they fit our minimum requirements. 
In my view, they did not fit our minimum requirements; they fit our reasonable requirements for constitutional amendment.  
Senator Wood :
Is it not true in the letter from the bishops of Quebec - the letter the honourable senator read - that they were in favour of repealing section 93? 
They questioned linguistic rights and suggested that denominational guarantees established by 107 be maintained. 
There was a caveat there that my honourable friend forgot to read.  
Senator Grafstein :
 COMMUNICATION FROM GOVERNMENT
 COMMUNICATION FROM HOUSE
 COMMUNICATION FROM HOUSE
 FROM GOVERNMENT COMMUNICATION
The Hon. the Speaker:
 The Hon Speaker the : .
 The the : . Speaker Hon
 the . : The Speaker Hon
 : The Speaker Hon . the
 The : . Speaker Hon the
 : Speaker The Hon . the
 the Speaker Hon . The :
 Hon The the : Speaker .
 Hon The : . the Speaker
 . the Speaker Hon : The
 the The Hon Speaker . :
 . Hon Speaker the : The
 . Hon The Speaker the :
 The the . : Speaker Hon
 Hon : Speaker . the The
 Speaker the The . : Hon
Pages Exchange Program with House of Commons 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, before I call for Senators' Statements, I should like to introduce the two pages who are with us this week through the exchange program with the House of Commons.  
They are Anne McCulluch of Calgary, Alberta, who is pursuing studies in journalism at Carleton University.  
Kirk Nangreaves of Saint-Hubert, Quebec, is studying at the University of Ottawa Arts Faculty.  
He is majoring in psychology.  
On behalf of all senators and the Senate, I bid you welcome.  
SENATORS' STATEMENTS 
The Senate 
Response to Newspaper Article on Senator's Residency Qualifications 
Hon. Colin Kenny :
Honourable senators, I rise today on behalf of a colleague who cannot be present, Senator Paul Lucier. 
Senator Lucier has sent me a fax which he has asked me to communicate to the chamber. 
For your benefit, he wants me to reply to the comments made about him in the media recently.  
He writes: 
I would like to make some points with respect to this matter: 
The Citizen said: "Paul Lucier said the Senate's legal staff approved his change in residency five years ago when he moved to Vancouver."  
Senator Lucier says: 
This is not true. 
I never spoke with legal staff five years ago about this. 
 The . the Speaker :
 : The Hon the Speaker
 The : Speaker Hon .
 : Speaker . the Hon
Honourable senators, I have the honour to inform you that I have received the following communication from Government House which reads as follows: 
 I Government as follows which you inform Honourable following have that the I received : House have , from the honour communication reads to senators
 the senators you communication : have follows have from House Government inform that following reads received to which I Honourable honour I the as ,
 Government , that Honourable you which have House I the reads received as to honour follows : inform communication have following I senators the from
 communication Government I following senators you House which reads , Honourable follows honour I have the the have from as to received that : inform
 House from : I as reads inform Honourable , the you Government which that senators following the have follows received honour communication have to I
 communication the that follows inform , : which House senators received have honour from reads following I the to as Government I have Honourable you
 that House received : have communication from you the honour which as I Honourable , senators reads have Government the inform follows I to following
 received reads House I : which senators communication , from inform have you Government to the Honourable follows as honour I have that following the
 as : reads honour following I to from have House that Honourable I received senators communication follows Government the inform you which , have the
 : inform , as have honour I I reads the that which following to the follows House have senators from you communication received Government Honourable
 following from I to reads follows communication have the have I , : you House inform Government Honourable honour the received senators that as which
 which I Government honour the follows have that : the have as you inform following from House received Honourable communication reads I to , senators
 that House Government reads the as received inform have I follows honour the I : communication following senators , to you which have from Honourable
 have , reads House : follows Honourable from have the honour following Government inform you that the which to I I as communication senators received
 following inform senators to I have as I Government have reads from follows you House which : , Honourable honour the communication the received that
 follows the honour have that : reads , following inform House Honourable communication to the which I as from senators have I you Government received
In addition, religious education as provided for in section 93 is reconfirmed in the province's Education Act, which by itself may be reassuring at first glance, but not in reality as it is a protection which is simply not as iron-clad as a constitutional guarantee.  
When the Education Act, Bill 107, was passed in 1994, the National Assembly agreed to apply the notwithstanding clause so that the privileges given to denominations in section 93 could not be successfully challenged under the Charter. 
Notwithstanding clauses expire every five years and this one is up in 1999. Will it be re-enacted? 
The Parti Québécois, in opposition, voted against it at the time. 
The two ministers who appeared before the joint committee would not reveal their party's position, preferring to await a broad consultation before stating it. 
An uninformed guess, however, leads me to believe that, if the Parti Québécois still forms the government two years hence, the notwithstanding clause will not be renewed, thereby leading to the gradual removal of Catholic and Protestant teaching in public schools as we know it today.  
In rebuttal to this, many will point to a letter sent to the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs by the Bishop of Baie-Comeau on behalf of the Assembly of Quebec Bishops. 
It is dated September 30, 1997, and appears as Appendix H in the joint committee report. 
In it, Bishop Morissette repeats the assembly's approval for the establishment of linguistic school boards, but he also adds an important caveat which was only given passing mention in the report itself. 
The letter states: 
Our approval for changing the status of school boards has always been accompanied by one condition: that the denominational guarantees established in Bill 107 be maintained.  
The Anglican Bishop of Montreal, in a letter dated November 3, 1997, to the same minister, and included in the report as Appendix I, wrote as follows: 
...we...favour the creation of linguistic school boards and the establishment of a non-denominational educational system which respects the choice of parents to require that their children receive religious and moral education in conformity with their beliefs.  
We cannot afford to ignore these views, particularly as they coincide with those of many, parents in particular, who testified before the committee. 
Linguistic schools are quite acceptable, we heard repeatedly, as long as the present religious component is maintained.  
Franco-Protestants and English Catholics were particularly concerned. 
While numerically they may not be impressive to others, surely they must be to the Parliament of Canada, the guardian of minority rights. 
Surely, the Parliament of Canada cannot subscribe to the notion that the rights of minorities can be altered, much less obliterated, by a decision of a majority when, at best, that majority may have a detached interest in the concerns and preoccupations of the minority.  
Some assurances may be found in a statement made by the Quebec Department of Education in a advertising supplement which appeared in The Gazette of Montreal on November 29. 
It is headed: "Confessional Schools and Services." 
 Honourable senators , I have the honour to inform you that I have received the following communication from Government House which reads as follows
 follows Honourable to I following from you House communication that senators which have : have honour received Government the reads the inform , I
 inform as the I have following you Honourable honour to the from that House have which , reads : Government communication senators follows I
 I to : Government you , which have following senators follows as I have reads inform the honour the from House received communication Honourable
September 22, 1997 
 , 22 September 1997
 , 22 1997 September
 , 1997 September 22
 22 1997 , September
 22 , 1997 September
 September 22 1997 ,
 22 September 1997 ,
 , 22 1997 September
 1997 , 22 September
 1997 September , 22
 1997 , September 22
 , September 1997 22
 September 22 1997 ,
 , 22 September 1997
 September 1997 22 ,
 , 1997 22 September
We have in Quebec two classes of English-speaking Quebecers.  
Quebec has been repeatedly criticized for this discrimination, and rightly so. 
How this undesirable situation developed can be traced to the then Minister of Justice, who is Prime Minister today.  
I will quote from his book, Straight from the Heart , where Mr. Chrétien describes how he was responsible for exempting Quebec from the crucial parts of section 23. 
He says: 
During the weeks that followed, I continued to try to overcome Quebec's objections, to the extent of modifying the principle of minority language education and agreeing to fiscal compensation when Quebec opted out of amendments that affected culture and education. 
That required a hell of a lot of selling to Trudeau, but he went along in the end, as did the nine other premiers, who were willing to reopen their sealed bargain in order to bring in Quebec. 
Mr. Chrétien goes on to say: 
I used to joke that these were the first constitutional amendments in history to have been negotiated over the telephone.  
Let it be noted that Mr. Chrétien takes pride of authorship - "of modifying the principle of minority education...". 
He boasts of getting the agreement of then Prime Minister Trudeau and the nine other premiers, and finds it amusing that this inexcusable abandonment of a fundamental principle was secured over the telephone.  
Honourable senators, Quebec's partial exemption from section 23 was initiated and approved by Mr. Chrétien by including the following in the Constitution Act, 1982: 
59(1) Paragraph 23(1)( a ) shall come into force in respect of Quebec on a day to be fixed by proclamation issued by the Queen or the Governor General under the Great Seal of Canada.  
(2) A proclamation under subsection (1) shall be issued only where authorized by the legislative assembly or government of Quebec. 
Section 23(1)( a ), from which Quebec is exempted by the authors of the Constitution Act themselves, requires that Canadian citizens: 
Finally, I want to comment on the notion of joint committees, particularly those charged with studying a particular item within a given period. 
It was said here, and repeated before the committee, that participation by the Senate must not be interpreted as an abandonment by it of the obligations imposed on the Senate in matters of constitutional amendments. 
It is true that, alone, we cannot defeat an amendment of this nature, as the Senate may be overruled by the House of Commons. 
However, as was shown in the case of the first Term 17 resolution, although the Senate impact on a constitutional amendment is limited, its efforts in this regard can be most constructive. 
I am convinced that if the amendments to it, which the Senate forwarded to the House, had been accepted, Parliament would not be faced with a second Term 17 resolution as it is now, as the Senate amendments satisfied the affected minorities while respecting the Government of Newfoundland's objectives.  
 September , 1997
 22 September ,
 , September 1997
 22 September ,
Sir, 
 Sir ,
 , Sir
 Sir ,
 Sir ,
 Sir ,
 Sir ,
 , Sir
 Sir ,
 , Sir
 Sir ,
 , Sir
 Sir ,
 , Sir
 , Sir
 Sir ,
 , Sir
It depends upon the answer.  
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, we must make an effort to allow committees to sit. 
They do invite witnesses, many of whom come from out of town. 
We inconvenience them if we are not able to hear from them.  
I must congratulate senators on this side who have refrained, for the most part, from making Senators' Statements on Wednesdays, unless it was something quite urgent, as was Senator Kenny's statement today. 
They have tried to make their speeches on either Tuesdays or Thursdays. 
Senators on the other side have attempted to do the same thing. 
With that level of cooperation, perhaps at some time in the future we can invoke a more formal process whereby there will be some guarantee to committee chairs.  
Barring that formal process, Senator Stewart has witnesses to hear from tomorrow, and I should like him to have permission to hear those witnesses tomorrow.  
Hon. John Lynch-Staunton (Leader of the Opposition) :
That worked for a while. 
Now we have forgotten Mondays, but we have continued on with the practice of having early sittings on Wednesdays. 
As a result, Wednesday has become a normal working session, going on until five or six o'clock. 
The whole purpose of starting the session at 1:30 p.m. has been defeated.  
I do not think it is correct, unless there is an urgency, for committees to sit at the same time as the chamber. 
This is not for appearances' sake, but because the work done here can often be as important in the debates as what goes on in committees. 
At various stages of our work - the introduction of bills, second reading, committee referral, then third reading - we are often doing several at the same time. 
Sometimes even two, three or four committees are sitting when we are sitting. 
That is an improper practice.  
 ,
 ,
 Sir
 ,
I am commanded to inform you that the Right Honourable Antonio Lamer, Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Canada, in his capacity as Deputy Governor General, will proceed to the Senate Chamber to open the First Session of the Thirty-Sixth Parliament of Canada on Monday, the 22nd day of September, 1997, at 11:00 a.m. 
 Monday inform , Canada , . 22nd day Deputy proceed : , on the , Court at Lamer his am the of Honourable of Antonio Parliament 00 Supreme Thirty to capacity of 1997 Governor the Session Chamber - Chief Senate 11 , that open the m of commanded to Sixth will First to Justice Canada of , as you . General a September in I Right the the
 that proceed Chief : of 22nd Antonio Honourable of inform of 1997 open to 11 I , the Session , Lamer in Canada , the Court capacity Monday Sixth , Chamber the Canada Deputy September - of the the First Supreme am as . Governor day a at on General . of his will , Thirty , to 00 Right the Justice Parliament you m to Senate commanded
 at Deputy will Chamber to Canada the Parliament Right - that m I Justice capacity proceed Antonio : the . Monday of his inform 1997 of the of the to General as Court 00 , September am Supreme Sixth in , , Canada of the Thirty . 22nd Session to Honourable the day on commanded a of , First you , open Governor Lamer 11 , Chief Senate
 m of Monday 22nd the Thirty Senate in Governor as the Supreme that : of 1997 Lamer capacity 00 Antonio Parliament Canada , of Right a , his Canada will , commanded inform 11 September on Session , to . General Court Deputy , Sixth Honourable am proceed First - of open to day Chamber . the Chief of I the Justice , the at you to the
 the 22nd as , 1997 Chamber Parliament , Antonio of Canada on , that of , Deputy open Court the to am , of a proceed in of the m at Session I the Canada the day - Lamer General 00 Governor September , Supreme Sixth : his 11 Monday Senate capacity commanded you to Thirty First will the Right Justice Honourable to . inform Chief . of
 proceed - the General Sixth capacity Chief Chamber to , Governor First Honourable 22nd , you in of the m 00 September day commanded Canada of , Court Parliament Supreme Thirty Deputy of to the his at , 11 , I Antonio on Senate will open of . Right , of inform 1997 that . a as to Monday the am Session Justice : Lamer Canada the the
 First Lamer General . Chief of Canada , , . Sixth the Session day 00 I the of Governor Monday at , Chamber Right of open proceed the will commanded the his : 1997 Supreme a Antonio , to September , capacity 11 Parliament the am as inform Court - in Senate of the that , Deputy of you to to 22nd Justice Honourable on Thirty m Canada
 Antonio , , 1997 his am to : 00 the the of First the Monday Session to Canada , of the Sixth proceed a , Chamber of will day September commanded Parliament capacity . I m Supreme inform Canada . - as the on that , Thirty 11 Lamer of open Deputy in you Justice , at Right to Court Governor Chief 22nd General the Senate Honourable of
 capacity Justice I Canada September - of the the the Supreme commanded you as that , 22nd on the of at of , . 1997 Senate Parliament Sixth Chief day Antonio the of 00 First , , to m his Session will in proceed Chamber am Monday Right Honourable , the a open : . Thirty General of to inform Canada Lamer to Court 11 , Deputy Governor
 Canada Chamber I , capacity Supreme proceed - Parliament a Justice . of of General you to the the the to open , m of . on September , Monday Chief Lamer Governor : 1997 First that the inform Canada Session Thirty as Right 22nd Court to his commanded , , at in the will Honourable of Deputy am 11 00 day the Sixth , Antonio of Senate
 Supreme First on I , the Honourable , the the to Right at of to Canada Chamber m : of in day . Parliament 1997 a 00 Canada 11 to , Deputy of the Governor General inform of - Senate am Chief as proceed , Monday his that capacity the Court Justice commanded , September Lamer Session Sixth Thirty , of 22nd . the Antonio you open will
 , Canada in , inform the the of 1997 proceed Senate , : to . Governor his Deputy Justice the Thirty Canada of 22nd capacity Court open on of - Session Monday 11 Parliament the to Chamber Chief Honourable , of you 00 at of , I commanded General the First Supreme will am , as the a that day Lamer m Sixth September to . Antonio Right
 Monday open General to Sixth Canada , Lamer Chief of Court at m 1997 on Thirty of his September to the , am a the First Justice , 00 of . I Right : Antonio Supreme in . Senate inform of the Governor 22nd , Canada of the the - capacity Honourable will commanded as Deputy Chamber 11 the , Parliament , you Session proceed that day to
 Lamer m General Justice of 1997 Chamber Senate capacity First the Deputy Right you as , to of Session Parliament will of the 00 commanded Supreme . , Monday 11 a . , , Court open the Sixth on , the Chief to Canada : of that proceed am September , in of I Honourable Antonio Thirty his 22nd inform the at day the Canada - to Governor
 , Monday a inform Supreme Canada Lamer , 00 to day his the September First as am Chamber 22nd , commanded of Governor Honourable Senate proceed . m Antonio to open , 1997 at Thirty capacity of on Court Deputy the Chief Justice you the 11 to will . the Right the , Session - Parliament the Canada , in Sixth of of I that : General of
 , the 00 inform Canada on m . , First Senate to Honourable Governor General Chamber Sixth the proceed to - capacity Parliament commanded the Chief day Justice 1997 as the , to I , in Supreme the the Canada you Thirty that . Lamer his a Deputy will September : 22nd Court of am open , 11 Right at Antonio of , of Monday of of Session
The National Assembly has endorsed this unanimously, as did most witnesses who stayed with the issue, with varying degrees of enthusiasm. 
Prominent legal experts even argued that various Supreme Court decisions have interpreted section 93 in such a way that it has lost much of its significance.  
All this may be true, but there are still Quebecers who feel that by adopting the resolution they will be abandoned by the very Parliament whose responsibility it is to protect them.  
I wish to end my remarks by quoting from an opinion which was given to the Quebec government by what is known as the Catholic Committee of the Education Council of the province of Quebec, a consultative body which is asked to give its views on issues affecting the Catholic religion in schools. 
This opinion was written and delivered following the hearings of the joint committee. 
It is very pertinent that we are all aware of them.  
I wish to quote from four paragraphs, and I am not quoting them out of context, as the sentiment in the four paragraphs I will quote reflect the tone of the entire paper. 
The implications of the constitutional amendment requested by the Quebec government are not easy to interpret or measure accurately. 
Concerns and objections have been expressed, particularly by the English Catholic and French Protestant minorities. 
Experts in constitutional law have said that the amendment could have a surprising impact, far beyond the limited effects usually referred to in the media. 
The public may have trouble grasping the real scope of what is happening or making its views known because it does not have access to the necessary information and means of communication. 
It must therefore be acknowledged that if Parliament grants the request, public support for the amendment is less certain than support for the creation of linguistic school boards....  
Bill 109 - 
- which is the Quebec Education Act passed in June - 
- upholds the principle of freedom of choice in schooling. 
However, the debates of the Joint Committee of the House of Commons and Senate highlighted the fact that the legislation in this area will be jeopardized the moment Quebec is excluded from the application of subsections 1 to 4 of section 93. 
The Committee therefore believes that the amendment could turn out to be something of a time bomb unless the Quebec government is prepared to renew the notwithstanding clauses or look for a better alternative that would allow it to retain in practical terms its authority to enact legislation on denominational schools....  
Finally: 
The Catholic Committee therefore strongly urges the Government of Quebec to immediately find a legal provision, constitutional or otherwise, that would allow it to strike a balance between the requirements of the Charters, including the requirements of section 41 of the Quebec Charter, and the legitimate expectations expressed by the public. 
Such a provision would rid the government of the dilemma described above concerning the use or elimination of the notwithstanding clauses. 
 I am commanded to inform you that the Right Honourable Antonio Lamer , Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Canada , in his capacity as Governor General , will proceed to the Senate Chamber to open the First Session of the Thirty - Sixth Parliament of Canada on Monday , the 22nd day of September , 1997 , at 11 : 00 a . m .
 Supreme am Canada Right , day as I General of . proceed , , Session of a Lamer commanded on Deputy you September , Parliament , the 11 m Governor Justice Senate of Honourable to to will of the Chief the 00 Sixth that Monday at the First , 22nd capacity in of his Canada 1997 Antonio . to Chamber the open - Thirty Court inform :
 in Thirty Court Canada of to - Sixth a day Chamber the , on the you Senate proceed as his Canada the , , First the of 22nd , of General capacity 00 commanded , Governor Chief the that 1997 Monday , . am inform of : I to Antonio September at Right m Parliament to 11 will of Session Supreme Justice Deputy . open the Honourable
 11 m 22nd of September to inform , commanded Governor as that First a proceed Chief to Deputy - of Right open the at Lamer to , you Canada 00 , , : the of . the 1997 will I Canada Honourable the . Thirty Sixth Monday his of Chamber on Parliament Senate Session the day Antonio capacity am , the in Supreme of Justice Court General
I have the honour to be, 
 , the honour be to I have
 the be , to have honour I
 the , have honour be to I
 to have be the , honour I
 to have the , honour I be
 I honour be have the , to
 be , have the to I honour
 have be the to honour , I
 be the , I have honour to
 to be the , I honour have
 honour be I , have the to
 honour I the have to , be
 honour to have I , the be
 have I , to the be honour
 have I the be , honour to
 , I honour to have the be
As Senator Lynch-Staunton put it so well, it means that there are in effect two classes in Quebec as it presently pertains. 
If you are English speaking and you come from outside of Canada, your children will be streamed by the Quebec government into the French-language stream. 
That is unfair. 
They are not without some type of relief and I will address that later.  
However, this is an issue of linguistic rights. 
Here the question is not of linguistic rights but denominational privileges.  
In cross-examining Alliance Quebec, it was clear that they did not oppose the amendments to section 93 but rather the enforcement of section 23(1)( a ). Section 23(1)( a ) requires a proclamation by the Province of Quebec, and a declaration of this proclamation is, of course, not within federal powers. 
We gave that up in 1982.  
Senator Pitfield knows this well. 
He was an architect of the Constitution Act, 1982. 
It is clearly within the four corners of the assembly of Quebec to proclaim, if it chooses, section 23(1)( a ). Many of us are unhappy with this aspect of section 23(1)( a ). Students in over 13,000 families have been precluded from entering the English stream because the Province of Quebec has refused to proclaim section 23(1)( a ). 
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Who put it in?  
Senator Grafstein :
Rather, they wished to use this opportunity to leverage the Government of Quebec to proclaim section 23(1)( a ). This the Quebec government was clearly not prepared to do.  
The second group, the aboriginal groups within Quebec, claimed that this resolution detrimentally affected their rights. 
The report makes clear - and we came to this conclusion aided and abetted by legal advice and statements by both Quebec and federal ministers - that aboriginal rights were in no way, shape or form, affected by this resolution. 
We said so in the report.  
This left two groups, small but important, who claim to be detrimentally affected. 
It was not clear that the entirety of these two groups were objecting. 
 I have the to be ,
 I to have honour , the
 have the honour to , be
 to the I , honour have
Secretary to the Governor General 
 Secretary Governor to General the
 General Governor Secretary to the
 to the General Governor Secretary
 Governor General Secretary to the
 Governor Secretary to the General
 the to Governor General Secretary
 Secretary to Governor General the
 to Governor the General Secretary
 Governor the to Secretary General
 to the Governor Secretary General
 the Governor Secretary General to
 the to Secretary Governor General
 to the Governor General Secretary
 Secretary General Governor the to
 Governor to the General Secretary
 Governor to Secretary the General
No, not that I am aware, but it is an interesting question. 
I will bring forth an answer.  
Delayed Answers to Oral Questions 
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, I have a response to a question raised in the Senate on November 25, 1997, by the Honourable Senator Oliver regarding changes to the Canada Pension Plan and the Investment Board; a response to a question raised in the Senate on November 19, 1997, by the Honourable Senator Oliver regarding the Investment Board not being subject to Access to Information; a response to a question raised in the Senate on October 23, 1997, by the Honourable Senator Kinsella regarding commemoration of the 50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights; a response to a question raised in the Senate on November 20, 1997, by the Honourable Senator Forrestall regarding the lack of helicopters for a number of navy frigates; and a response to a question raised in the Senate on November 20, 1997, by the Honourable Senator Spivak regarding the demolition of government laboratories and the possibility of a restoration of funding.  
Human Resources Development 
Changes to Canada Pension Plan-Accountability and Transparency of Investment Board-Undertaking to Publish Quarterly Financial Statements-Government Position 
(Response to question raised by Hon. Donald H. Oliver on November 25, 1997) 
Bill C-2 requires that the Board prepare unaudited quarterly statements and provide them to the federal and provincial Ministers of Finance. 
The Board may choose to make those statements directly available to the public but the legislation does not require this.  
During the consultations on the draft CPP legislation, including House of Commons Finance Committee hearings, several pension fund experts recommended against publishing quarterly statements. 
They argued that the routine publication of quarterly results could tend to draw attention away from the longer-term investment objectives of the Board. 
Other large pension funds like the Ontario Municipal Employees Retirement System and the Ontario Teachers Pension Plan do not publish their quarterly results for these reasons. 
For a pension fund, long-term investment performance is paramount.  
Changes to Canada Pension Plan-Investment Board Not Subject to Access to Information Act-Government Position 
(Response to question raised by Donald H. Oliver on November 19, 1997) 
Applying the Access to Information Act to the CPP Investment Board would be inappropriate.  
The Board's mandate is to invest CPP funds at arm's length from governments in the best interest of plan members. 
As an investment institution, much of its day-to-day activities will be commercially sensitive and would be exempt under ATI in any event.  
While ATI does not apply to the CPP Investment Board, by legislation and regulations the Board's operations will be very transparent and it will be subject to close public scrutiny.  
 Secretary the Governor General
 the to Governor General
 Governor the General Secretary
 the Secretary to General
The Speaker of the Senate 
 Senate The the of Speaker
 of the Senate The Speaker
 Senate Speaker of the The
 Speaker Senate The of the
 the Senate The Speaker of
 Speaker Senate The the of
 Senate the Speaker of The
 Speaker Senate the The of
 of Senate The the Speaker
 Speaker Senate The of the
 the The Senate of Speaker
 of the The Speaker Senate
 Senate of The the Speaker
 of Speaker The Senate the
 Speaker Senate of the The
 of Senate Speaker the The
In an article in The Globe and Mail yesterday, it was stated: 
With Ontario's Ernie Eves and B.C.'s Andrew Petter leading the charge, the provincial ministers have made it clear that they consider Mr. Martin's recent $1.4 billion cut to unemployment insurance premiums insufficient...  
The premiers have insisted that they have some input into Ottawa's budget-making and how it allocates the surplus among new spending, tax cuts and debt repayment.  
In a telephone interview on Friday, Mr. Petter said the NDP government in British Columbia wants Ottawa to offset a dramatic increase in Canada Pension Plan premiums with reductions in UI premiums.  
"We're worried about the impact that Canada Pension Plan increases will have in terms of the burden they will impose on business and workers, and the potential they have to reduce job creation by a huge amount if they go ahead without some kind of offsetting relief," Mr. Petter said.  
Ontario's Conservative government is also demanding large cuts to UI premiums, Mr. Eves said in an interview...  
Alberta Treasurer Stockwell Day also indicated last week that he'll be pushing Mr. Martin for tax cuts.  
I predict today that, although this government has managed to get away with things for which our government would have been slaughtered, I think this bill, coupled with what is coming down the track and the changes in OAS and GIS, coupled with the arrogance of the stance taken at Kyoto, this is the kind of arrogance that, inevitably, will be the downfall of this government. 
I predict that that is about to happen.  
Hon. Thelma J. Chalifoux :
Honourable senators, I have a number of concerns regarding the statements of Senator Stratton. 
I would like to know what his position is on the working poor and on part-time workers. 
In this country, there are more part-time workers and more working poor than there are people who identify as middle class. 
What is the honourable senator's opinion on that?  
In this country, we have a totally isolated segment of society which is called "the mid-Canada corridor." 
Even in terms of communications, there is very little. 
What would the honourable senator do in the area of communication for those in isolated settlements regarding private pension plans? 
There are no words in Cree or michif for "private pension plan."  
I was a member of the working poor in 1965 and 1966 when this plan was put into force. 
I did not agree with the Canada Pension Plan. 
 The Speaker of the
 Senate Speaker The the
 Speaker Senate The of
 the Speaker of The
The Hon. the Speaker:
 the The : Speaker . Hon
 Speaker The : Hon . the
 The the . : Hon Speaker
 . The Speaker the : Hon
 Hon Speaker . : the The
 : The Speaker the . Hon
 . Speaker Hon the : The
 : . The Speaker the Hon
 the Hon : Speaker . The
 the . : Speaker The Hon
 Hon The Speaker the . :
 : Hon Speaker the The .
 The : . the Hon Speaker
 the Speaker Hon . : The
 the . Hon Speaker The :
 . : Speaker the The Hon
Human Resources Development 
Changes to Canada Pension Plan-Accountability and Transparency of Investment Board-Undertaking to Publish Quarterly Financial Statements-Government Position 
Changes to Canada Pension Plan-Investment Board Not Subject to Access to Information Act-Government Position 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
Commemoration of Fiftieth Anniversary-Plans of Government 
Activities planned around December 10, 1997 for the launch of the 50th Anniversary commemorative year of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) 
National Defence 
Lack of Helicopter for Number of Navy Frigates-Government Position 
Forestry 
Demolition of Government Laboratories-Possibility of Restoration of Funding-Government Position 
Answers to Order Paper Questions Tabled 
Energy-Department of the Environment-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Energy-Department of Justice-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Energy-Department of Multiculturalism-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Energy-Department of Natural Resources-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Defence-Status of Clothe the Soldier Project 
Defence-Status of the Armoured Personnel Carrier Replacement Program 
Business of the Senate 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
Second Reading-Debate Continued 
 Hon . the Speaker :
 : Speaker The Hon .
 Hon the Speaker : .
 . Hon Speaker The the
Honourable senators, pursuant to rule 135(4), the sitting is suspended until 10:55 a.m. 
 sitting until 10 . 4 , the : pursuant . is a rule 55 suspended senators ), 135 Honourable ( to m
 : ), . 55 senators until is m pursuant , 135 4 a the to 10 . ( rule suspended sitting Honourable
 senators m 10 pursuant Honourable to 4 suspended . : the 55 is , rule ( until ), 135 . a sitting
 senators sitting is Honourable 55 : pursuant ( ), the . suspended to 4 rule 10 m 135 . until , a
 m . ( rule ), 55 sitting the . suspended a pursuant is until 135 : senators to Honourable , 4 10
 ( sitting . suspended senators a rule , is the Honourable until to . 55 pursuant : 135 ), 10 4 m
 Honourable , sitting to : 55 4 is a rule senators 135 ( . the 10 m until suspended . pursuant ),
 until . 135 55 10 , to . suspended is a Honourable ( rule 4 ), : pursuant senators the m sitting
 Honourable to a until senators the suspended . is , ( . : ), 55 10 sitting 4 pursuant 135 m rule
 , suspended until is ), 10 : 4 rule a . 135 m ( pursuant . Honourable to 55 the sitting senators
 sitting : until the is ), ( a m 10 , Honourable pursuant . rule to senators . 135 4 suspended 55
 a 55 4 until rule senators to suspended ( 10 . Honourable , the 135 ), is sitting pursuant . : m
 senators is . to 10 suspended ( a 4 : Honourable , the 135 55 rule m pursuant until ), . sitting
 ), ( . , to rule a 10 pursuant 55 suspended the m Honourable is . senators : 4 sitting until 135
 suspended the 135 is ), senators : ( sitting Honourable pursuant 4 10 until . 55 . m a to , rule
 , ( suspended 135 . to . the sitting senators ), m pursuant Honourable is rule until : a 55 10 4
Perhaps we, as senators, will be able to discuss this matter well into the new year, which I hope we do.  
Senator Gigantès :
You are reading from the wrong script.  
Senator Taylor :
It is obvious that my honourable friend does not have any notes.  
Senator Tkachuk :
I think I am getting to honourable senators opposite.  
I was told by the Honourable Senator Kirby that members opposite would only have one speaker on this issue. 
I have a feeling that we may hear from a few more senators after I and other senators point out some of the weaknesses in Bill C-2.  
Honourable senators, I would reiterate that this is not a pension program: this is a payroll tax! 
In the past, it harboured cheap loans for provinces, and it will harbour a $100-billion fund that will grow to a $1-trillion fund. 
Honourable senators, we will not need to pay the price. 
We will be long gone before the young people who starting out now, and who expect a pension plan when they grow old, will reap the benefits of what we sow today.  
Honourable senators on this side and honourable senators on the other side, I do not know why you would want to rush this bill. 
What is in it for you? 
What is in it for the Minister of Finance? 
What is in it for anyone to rush this bill through Parliament by December 19? 
No reasonable explanation has been given to me, and I am sure no reasonable explanation has been given to my honourable friends, other than the PMO, Mr. Goldenberg and Mr. Martin, telling you to pass this bill by December 19. 
They are telling you not to think about the consequences, because they are right. 
How do we know they are right? 
 Honourable senators , pursuant to rule 135 ( 4 ), the sitting is suspended until : 55 a . m .
 ( , the Honourable m senators 4 ), 55 sitting a 10 . : suspended . until is to rule 135
 , m 55 senators the suspended sitting : pursuant rule ), a 135 to . is 10 until Honourable ( .
 suspended the : , 4 10 ( Honourable rule 135 pursuant ), is to . . 55 m until a senators
The Senate adjourned during pleasure.  
 adjourned Senate pleasure during . The
 . The during adjourned pleasure Senate
 adjourned . The Senate during pleasure
 The adjourned . pleasure during Senate
 adjourned . Senate during pleasure The
 The . pleasure during adjourned Senate
 adjourned . pleasure during Senate The
 Senate The adjourned . during pleasure
 adjourned pleasure . Senate during The
 The pleasure . Senate adjourned during
 adjourned . during pleasure Senate The
 adjourned . during Senate pleasure The
 adjourned The pleasure . during Senate
 . adjourned Senate The during pleasure
 Senate adjourned during pleasure The .
 adjourned pleasure . during The Senate
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
I had thought that Mr. Dion answered that question himself on the weekend when he said that a UDI would be illegal.  
Senator Nolin :
The Prime Minister has said he was prepared to negotiate. 
The Leader of the Government in the Senate has said the government is not prepared to negotiate.  
This morning, the Quebec minister of intergovernmental affairs, Mr. Brassard, said, and I quote: 
This is what we have always said.  
Bear in mind that this minister is a separatist. 
I repeat what he said: 
This is what we have always said.  
Mr. Chrétien has acknowledged that the federal government would negotiate. 
Could the Leader of the Government in the Senate tell us under what authority the Prime Minister could negotiate?  
Senator Graham :
The Prime Minister would be negotiating on behalf of Canadians, but recognizing at the same time that nine other provinces and the territories are involved. 
I am sure the Prime Minister would take all of that into consideration.  
Senator Nolin :
The Supreme Court received the request from your government to decide on the issue of Quebec's secession. 
We will learn in all likelihood from the Supreme Court that the amending formula would be appropriate if Canadians agreed to allow one province to separate from the others. 
Have the Prime Minister, the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs or officials of your government had formal or informal discussions on this matter with the representatives of the nine other provinces?  
Senator Graham :
 The adjourned during pleasure .
 The Senate adjourned pleasure .
 The adjourned pleasure Senate .
 The adjourned pleasure . during
At 10:55 a.m. the sitting was resumed, and was then adjourned, pending the arrival of the Deputy of His Excellency the Governor General.  
 then the adjourned sitting General . and the a 55 , the was Governor was of the At . . 10 , arrival : resumed pending His of m Excellency Deputy
 pending arrival . adjourned . and a sitting 55 General At the then Governor Excellency was m , . 10 the of the was of Deputy the His resumed : ,
 the was 10 arrival . then sitting resumed . of 55 of His , . adjourned Governor , and the was pending At : m General a Deputy the Excellency the
 adjourned then was , 55 the and . of the : the the Governor , . . 10 a pending Excellency sitting At arrival resumed His was General of m Deputy
 arrival . At sitting Excellency , Governor m the was the was a pending : and resumed the Deputy General of adjourned , . . 10 the His of then 55
 and Governor His At . arrival m the : 55 pending General adjourned Excellency then , 10 was . a resumed Deputy of sitting of . the the was the ,
 m : 10 . of His resumed of 55 was sitting General a was adjourned At . , the Excellency and then arrival pending . Governor the the Deputy the ,
 10 55 , the adjourned of : At General resumed the , the pending sitting m Excellency was His . the arrival then Deputy Governor and of . . a was
 , . , 10 was the . sitting the pending of m was : of and Governor 55 His adjourned the arrival a Deputy . Excellency then At resumed the General
 resumed His arrival the 55 and of the 10 , . a . then Deputy sitting : was General the pending , of m Governor adjourned . the was Excellency At
 At pending , Governor 10 . resumed Excellency arrival the , of the a sitting was of . adjourned the the Deputy m : then His and General was 55 .
 General Excellency pending of adjourned His a 10 , . was sitting At resumed was arrival the , of the then the . m and : . 55 Deputy the Governor
 , Deputy and His the pending of 10 : the 55 resumed At arrival of Governor General a was . adjourned the . the Excellency then . was m , sitting
 General m the pending arrival sitting His , : . 10 and , adjourned Excellency Governor . the resumed was 55 of then of . the was a Deputy the At
 sitting , and adjourned then 10 the a Excellency , : the Governor was arrival the was His General pending resumed 55 Deputy m of the of . At . .
 of General . 55 was sitting 10 the the . Excellency the was of arrival then His resumed a : Governor At Deputy m , adjourned and . , pending the
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, my honourable friend would be the first to recognize that it is not appropriate for me to comment on any discussions that took place in cabinet this morning. 
Hon. Lowell Murray :
Would it be appropriate for the honourable minister to let us know whether it was considered last week?  
Senator Graham :
The matter of the helicopters is under active consideration by the government.  
Cabinet met last Thursday. 
Senator Forrestall :
If that is the last cabinet meeting before the Christmas break, I gather we will not see any decision until sometime in the new year.  
Senator Graham :
If that is a question, I would hope my honourable friend is wrong, and that I am correct in saying that it is to be hoped that there will be a decision before the end of this year.  
Senator Forrestall :
Cabinet will meet again, then. 
I am pleased to hear that.  
Search and Rescue Helicopter Replacement Program-State of Sea King Helicopter Fleet-Government Position 
Hon. J. Michael Forrestall :
Where are the other six? 
Are they on ships at sea? 
We have 30 in the inventory.  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
 At : 55 a . m . the sitting was resumed , and was then adjourned , pending the arrival of the Deputy of His Excellency the Governor General .
 of the : Deputy sitting and . . His was resumed 55 the Excellency was Governor adjourned then , At General of m 10 the pending arrival , a .
 and was . General Excellency a the . At sitting then of , , 10 . 55 : the m the pending the His adjourned arrival Deputy resumed was Governor
 . the and , the At Excellency : 10 a arrival resumed 55 adjourned . m then Deputy pending General . , the His the Governor was sitting of of
The Right Honourable Antonio Lamer, Deputy of His Excellency the Governor General, having come and being seated, 
 Right the Excellency , General and Honourable Deputy Governor His , Lamer The come , being of seated having Antonio
 and having being Lamer Governor come Excellency Right Honourable The , seated , the General His Antonio of Deputy ,
 Governor , the Lamer of General come His and The Right Antonio Excellency Honourable having , , seated Deputy being
 His Deputy General the Honourable Lamer Right of Governor The being , Antonio come seated Excellency having and , ,
 Deputy General Excellency Lamer Antonio Honourable , Right , , The seated the of and being having Governor come His
 having , , Antonio Deputy come His General of Governor The Excellency being Right seated Honourable Lamer the and ,
 Right seated General Excellency Lamer , Governor Honourable come having Antonio The of , His , the Deputy being and
 Governor The of General being Deputy , Honourable Excellency His seated and the , Lamer having Antonio Right come ,
 The , Governor the Lamer Deputy Excellency General having Antonio seated Honourable Right come , being His , and of
 come , , , seated Honourable Deputy of Antonio and Governor Excellency Lamer having The Right being the General His
 Antonio , Honourable Excellency Right , Deputy His come being General the Lamer having The Governor and seated of ,
 Honourable , Antonio Deputy Excellency being seated and His , having General Right the of Governor come , The Lamer
 His having Antonio of Excellency , General and the , Right being , Deputy Honourable Governor seated The Lamer come
 of , seated Deputy Right Honourable Governor being His and come the General , having The Lamer , Antonio Excellency
 seated Antonio and , being Governor , His the , come The of Right Excellency Lamer Honourable Deputy General having
 come General Deputy having His Lamer The Right and , , of seated the , Governor being Excellency Antonio Honourable
Nor did they take any responsibility after their failed strategy in job creation. 
Nor did they take responsibility after almost losing the country in the Quebec referendum. 
"Trust us," they say. 
One thing we can count on is if this government says it is good for Canada, it is not good for Canadians.  
At the time of the 1966 social contract with Canadians, the Liberals were in power. 
They entered into a social contract with their citizens. 
It was they who did it. 
"We will take your money and provide you with a pension," they said. 
As soon as they got their grubby hands on the cash, it was lent to the provinces at favourable interest rates. 
They were cheating Canadians who trusted that when they got old, they would have a pension. 
Baby boomers, who have paid all their working lives since the program's inception, now have the audacity to reach 50. 
We have had the audacity to reach 50!  
Senator Cools :
Not me.  
Senator Tkachuk :
Then they had the gall to limit their breeding, thus causing a situation whereby, 15 years from now, there will be fewer people working to pay for the people who turn 65 at that time. 
They limited their breeding. 
From what we know of social behaviour during the 1970s, abstinence was not the order of the day. 
People were, shall I say, "fuddling". 
It was not their fault; it was the fault of scientists. 
 The Right Antonio Lamer , Deputy of His Excellency the Governor General , having come and being seated ,
 The , His the General Right Lamer Antonio Deputy Honourable come having Excellency , seated Governor and , being
 General Honourable having Governor being Right Excellency , come of and Lamer , Deputy The Antonio His seated the
 seated , His Antonio Governor General , the of The Honourable , being Deputy having and Lamer come Excellency
The Hon. the Speaker commanded the Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod to proceed to the House of Commons and acquaint that House that it is the desire of the Honourable the Deputy of His Excellency the Governor General that they attend him immediately in the Senate Chamber.  
 desire and Rod to they Hon The the Commons commanded Usher House the immediately . proceed attend Speaker of Excellency of that the the Black His of is Deputy Governor Gentleman of . General the the to that him Senate it the in acquaint that Honourable the House the Chamber
 General is proceed . and the that Hon House to His Black The the the the Deputy the the Excellency to Governor it in immediately of Chamber the Usher attend him they Gentleman Senate desire acquaint Honourable Rod of of commanded that that House of the Commons Speaker . the
 House of attend Chamber in the Honourable Usher the the Rod of that immediately . it Commons the Excellency desire His The General of . Deputy commanded of to that Speaker proceed the Gentleman the him is the Black the the and Hon to House acquaint Governor that they Senate
 that Black the it desire the him Rod that they His Deputy Hon in of of commanded the the attend Senate the the to Usher that Governor . General Chamber House Honourable The proceed House and the of Excellency is Commons the . the Speaker of Gentleman immediately acquaint to
 immediately in proceed the Honourable the Senate Black The Usher House that Deputy His Commons and him that it the of Chamber Governor Gentleman . House General of . the the attend Excellency to the commanded Speaker desire the the acquaint that Hon is to of Rod they the of
 and Rod Black it the they . Usher His the attend of commanded of desire the General Speaker of of to Honourable Chamber House Gentleman that The immediately Commons in is to the Governor that Deputy that proceed the the the Excellency the . the acquaint House him Hon Senate
 in commanded Rod to of acquaint Usher it Hon attend the His immediately of The Black the proceed and Deputy that to the desire him that . Chamber of Gentleman of Senate House Commons the the the that Speaker Excellency the House General is . the Governor Honourable they the
 and the the they Hon attend him Deputy commanded it in The House of acquaint Senate . Gentleman to desire of Black that Governor that to the immediately Chamber the is Honourable Commons of the the of Speaker General Excellency Usher House Rod the the proceed . His that the
 House and desire Governor the that of The General to . Hon acquaint Usher His Excellency is Senate it commanded to the Gentleman they Honourable . the proceed the Chamber Rod that the attend Speaker House in the the Commons Deputy of of the that immediately of Black him the
 commanded of Rod that to House attend of Commons of the the . Governor General Gentleman Black the The Deputy they Hon the and to His Excellency . is the the Honourable that proceed in acquaint immediately the House Chamber Usher desire that Senate him Speaker of the it the
 they Commons attend the Gentleman Black is of . . House Rod that the Hon that Deputy of in the the His him Speaker acquaint House Governor the General The commanded the immediately Senate the Usher it desire to Honourable proceed the that to Chamber Excellency of of and the
 The Governor acquaint immediately Usher General that the . Hon commanded him of House desire of the of Rod the the that of the the Speaker in Deputy the to His attend Honourable they Excellency that the is the Senate to and . proceed Commons Chamber Black it Gentleman House
 that General the Commons Deputy . is His House the in to that of Hon that Black immediately Honourable it attend the Senate desire the the The Excellency commanded Chamber the to acquaint of the and Gentleman . House proceed the Governor Usher the Rod they him of of Speaker
 they House that to His Governor the Gentleman it to the House Honourable the attend the The . of immediately the proceed Commons of that is him the Senate . that the Chamber in desire Usher Excellency Rod of and Hon of Black Deputy Speaker the General commanded the acquaint
 immediately the in the Gentleman Excellency Chamber the him commanded of Hon the the General they desire the it Black House Honourable Senate Rod to . House to Commons His the Speaker Deputy Governor The Usher attend the of and that that of is acquaint of . proceed that the
 the . the His Honourable the immediately they of of attend Gentleman Excellency that that him Senate Rod of Deputy desire proceed The House Commons to House Usher the the acquaint the to is the Speaker it Governor Hon of that the in General commanded . Chamber the Black and
For me, the question is elucidation for honourable senators to consider that report. 
To me, the evidence and the outcome are clear. 
There may be evidence in other places, and there may be views held by other people, but I had the evidence before the committee. 
I would not say it was totally unequivocal, but it was clear enough to satisfy me that there was a high enough hurdle having been passed to support the federal resolution. 
That is what I have said in my speech. 
Read the evidence. 
Read the transcript. 
It is clear.  
Senator Bolduc :
Honourable senators, I have listened to your arguments attentively. 
You have argued your case like good lawyers. 
There is no doubt about that. 
What you said basically is that it is up to Quebec to address its education problem and decide whether there will be guarantees of denominational education in the schools. 
You say it is a provincial problem. 
In my speech, I have said that there is no guarantee whatsoever that that is what will happen. 
But the right to dissentience that was guaranteed under section 93 of the Constitution will no longer be protected. 
The opinion of the Parti Québécois on this is known, and that is why it is a bit awkward.  
Senator Grafstein :
There are two parts to my honourable friend's question.  
I say, "Yes."  
 The Hon . the Speaker commanded the Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod proceed to the House of Commons and acquaint that House that it is the desire of the Honourable the Deputy of His Excellency the Governor General that they attend him immediately in the Senate Chamber .
 the that acquaint that Chamber the of of . the . to Rod that House desire the attend of the Governor the the Speaker in the it Deputy Excellency Usher Senate of Gentleman Black Hon commanded the is General immediately House they him to Commons and Honourable The His
 commanded is the Speaker the that House of the His the the Senate they House Rod in that to General the it and acquaint the Hon him Excellency Honourable The that immediately Governor Gentleman Usher Black desire of . of proceed of Chamber the attend the to . Deputy
 it Commons to Hon of Chamber is the Senate Honourable Speaker . the that immediately Governor in The Deputy the acquaint of His the the desire him of proceed . General they the and Excellency the to that of that the commanded Gentleman Usher the Black Rod House attend
Who being come, 
 being , come Who
 being , Who come
 being Who , come
 come Who being ,
 Who , being come
 come , Who being
 Who come , being
 Who come , being
 come Who being ,
 come Who , being
 come Who being ,
 Who being , come
 come Who being ,
 , Who come being
 come being Who ,
 Who being , come
The Senate 
Conduct of Business-Notice of Inquiry 
Hon. William M. Kelly :
Honourable senators, I give notice: 
That on Thursday next, December 11, 1997, I will call the attention of the Senate to the way in which the Senate conducts its business.  
QUESTION PERIOD 
Federal-Provincial Relations 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Province of Quebec-Request for Particulars 
Hon. Fernand Roberge :
Honourable senators, my question follows the announcement made yesterday regarding the government's decision to set at $12.5 billion the cash floor for transfer payments made under the Canada health and social transfer (CHST). 
The government would have us believe that this amount represents an increase in health care payments. 
However, the figures indicate otherwise.  
The following year, in 1999-2000, they will only be $3.748 billion. 
Yet, the government claimed yesterday that it was implementing a stable transfer system. 
In fact, cash payments paid to Quebec for health and education will be reduced by over $300 million over a five-year period. 
Honourable senators, I remind you that these cuts are in addition to this year's reduction of $700 million compared to last year. 
Could the minister make inquiries and inform the Senate of the reasons why, in spite of a cash floor set at $12.5 billion, Quebec's share will diminish by $307 million over the next five years?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
The federal government cut its own spending earlier, more drastically and in greater measure than transfers to the provinces. 
The government has made it clear that it will use increased fiscal flexibility to make strategic investments in priority areas, and action was taken early and directly on that commitment based on favourable fiscal results that emerged this past spring.  
 Who come ,
 Who , come
 being come ,
 come Who being
The Hon. the Speaker said: 
 . : The said Speaker Hon the
 Speaker the The Hon said : .
 : said . The Hon Speaker the
 The the Hon . said Speaker :
 said Hon : The Speaker the .
 . said the The Hon : Speaker
 : Speaker said . The Hon the
 . Speaker The the said Hon :
 : the Speaker The . said Hon
 The . Hon : said Speaker the
 Speaker . : The the Hon said
 . Speaker : the said The Hon
 The : Speaker Hon said . the
 Hon Speaker said The . : the
 said Hon Speaker the The . :
 Hon : said Speaker The . the
The Roman Catholic Archbishops of Quebec and the Anglican Archbishop have letters on record in which they clearly indicate they did not oppose the amendment.  
I want to read those letters into the record because they are important.  
A different situation exists in Quebec. 
Nevertheless, our assembly did not oppose the choice to amend section 93. 
It has always been our conviction that the choice of means is the responsibility of the political authorities.  
They did not oppose.  
The Anglican Archbishop, Archbishop Andrew S. Hutchison, said the following at paragraph 2 of his letter dated November 3: 
The amendments proposed to Article 93 by the Quebec government, which would remove the obligation for the Quebec government to have confessional school boards, seems reasonable to us and in keeping with traditional positions enunciated by the Anglican church.  
Honourable senators, the senior representatives of the mainstream Roman Catholic and Protestant groups did not register their opposition to these changes. 
This does not mean that this exercise was one of perfection. 
Indeed, many of us remain unhappy and regret the federal government's position taken with 23(1)( a ) then and now. 
I share, with Senator Pitfield and others, concern in that respect. 
However, unfortunately, I have a memory, and I recall very well that the 1982 Constitution, for which Senator Pitfield was a senior federal advisor, was a minimalist not a maximalist document. 
It was Senator Pitfield and others in power at the time who determined that, in order to pass the 1982 Constitution, the Province of Quebec should be given the option of proclaiming section 23(1)( a ) and that the notwithstanding clause would be incorporated in the 1982 Constitution to eviscerate the charter, both serious sources of our current distress.  
Many of us objected strenuously then, and do now, to giving the Province of Quebec these options. 
However, that is history. 
Many of us objected to the notwithstanding clause pressed by the other provinces, particularly Manitoba. 
Senator Pitfield was there. 
He understood that. 
This I remember.  
 The Hon . the Speaker said
 The said the : Hon .
 . the Speaker said Hon :
 Speaker the The . said Hon
Honourable Members of the Senate: 
 of : Senate the Members Honourable
 : the of Senate Members Honourable
 : Senate Members Honourable the of
 the of Members : Senate Honourable
 Honourable : Members the Senate of
 Members the : Honourable of Senate
 of the : Members Senate Honourable
 of Members Honourable the : Senate
 Senate of : Members Honourable the
 of the : Members Senate Honourable
 Senate of the Members Honourable :
 the Honourable Members Senate : of
 : Honourable Members Senate of the
 the of : Senate Honourable Members
 of Honourable the Senate : Members
 of the Honourable Members : Senate
With a system such as the one proposed, one thing is for sure. 
There will be no Trevor Eyton to squander the money, there will be no Conrad Black or Olympia & York to take it away from you.  
Senator Bolduc :
I do not want to answer questions on specific cases, because I find it objectionable.  
Hon. Gerry St. Germain :
Honourable senators, the honourable senator who has just spoken brings a wealth of experience to this chamber. 
He was one of the top bureaucrats and one of the top men in the Quebec government at one time. 
He brings that experience to this forum.  
I would prefer to ask this question of the government side, but no one will speak further on it. 
Therefore, I will ask Senator Bolduc.  
This involves a question that I asked Senator Kirby yesterday. 
It is a question of accountability. 
In theory, it is possible that this fund will become larger than the entire budget of the federal government in the years to come. 
Yet we are placing it in the hands of 12 people.  
Does the Honourable Senator Bolduc concur, as Senator Kirby did, that there should be some scrutiny by Senate and House of Commons committees whereby these 12 people who will be sitting on this board will be under a certain amount of scrutiny before they are placed in this lofty, powerful, very responsible position?  
Senator Bolduc :
Honourable senators, that is a very good question. 
There is one thing in the bill that is very acceptable. 
The Auditor General will be able to look at the management of the Investment Board.  
As a result, there will be some accountability in the form of an audit. 
 Honourable Members the Senate :
 of Members Honourable : the
 of : Honourable Senate Members
 Members of Senate Honourable the
Members of the House of Commons: 
 Members of House of : Commons the
 Members House : the of of Commons
 : House the Members Commons of of
 : the of House of Members Commons
 House Members Commons : the of of
 House of Members : the Commons of
 of : the Members Commons House of
 House of of Commons the Members :
 : Members of Commons the of House
 : House Members the of of Commons
 : of the House of Members Commons
 of of Members : House the Commons
 Members : of of House Commons the
 House : of of Commons the Members
 House of the of Commons Members :
 House of the Members : of Commons
4. I would like to have these points clarified but not in the media. 
I truly appreciate all the support I have received from my colleagues regarding this subject. 
Thanks to all of you.  
History of the Vote in Canada 
Book Launched by Governor General 
Hon. Mabel M. DeWare :
Honourable senators, yesterday, the Right Honourable Romeo LeBlanc, Governor General of Canada, launched an important new book, A History of the Vote in Canada , which recounts how the right to vote has evolved over the past 250 years. 
The book starts at the time of the first elected legislatures in what is now Canada and ends with the most recent federal election. 
It traces changes in voting eligibility, electioneering and voting practices, as well as voter turnout since Confederation. 
Extension of the vote to those who were excluded legally from the franchise, such as women, aboriginal people, religious and racial minorities, is examined in the social context of the period.  
Even though most Canadian adults were eligible to vote by 1920, there is a final chapter that looks at ways to make voting accessible to everyone, including people in all geographic locations and people with physical disabilities.  
A History of the Vote in Canada is meant to be an educational resource and a reminder to Canadians of the significance of the right to vote. 
This is in keeping with Elections Canada's 1993 mandate to educate voters about the democratic right to vote.  
While this book will appeal to historians, political scientists, university and high school teachers and students, it is hoped that it will also reach those who may have difficulty exercising their right to vote.  
As parliamentarians, honourable senators, it is our role to help promote this book and educate our fellow citizens on their rights as voters.  
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
Report of Committee 
Hon. Ron Ghitter , Chair of the Standing Senate Committee on Energy, the Environment and Natural Resources, presented the following report: 
Tuesday, December 9, 1997 
The Standing Senate Committee on Energy, the Environment and Natural Resources has the honour to present its 
 of the House of Commons :
 of of Members Commons the House
 Commons House Members : of the
 of House the of Commons Members
I have it in command to let you know that His Excellency the Governor General does not see fit to declare the causes of his summoning the present Parliament of Canada until a Speaker of the House of Commons shall have been chosen, according to law; but tomorrow, Tuesday, September 23, 1997, at the hour of two-thirty o'clock in the afternoon, His Excellency will declare the causes of his calling this Parliament.  
 it this law present been until 23 have . shall 1997 thirty calling afternoon the to causes chosen , - a in of Excellency His , of the September , Excellency the command let Commons I ; of the of clock , at the see the know his House causes hour declare fit according of have that not in Tuesday his you ' Parliament tomorrow General Governor Canada Speaker o , summoning two but of Parliament will to the His , declare does to
 his the , according of His 23 Speaker a will Governor to calling summoning until House , thirty to . in tomorrow General the that declare to Commons declare - causes the shall present the Excellency ; causes let in , this afternoon chosen hour it command the , Parliament at of fit you law does two Excellency of the of , , Tuesday know ' not have been have but Parliament His the see Canada of of his o 1997 clock September I
 have will thirty shall , Canada of 1997 at . you , causes law hour it Excellency September clock of His chosen Governor to summoning , to command the of of calling have declare his , I of but o see fit according afternoon this , House until present Speaker General the in - ; Tuesday let the Commons does Parliament Excellency not of tomorrow to been the Parliament his ' the in a causes , declare know two the His the 23 that
 according Parliament that of to know , until o Parliament Governor of General see shall 1997 his Excellency September have causes it the you the command His , of , the been declare causes Speaker a , ' thirty the of His does . 23 two will hour to in to present in have House his afternoon Commons - at calling but the clock law not , Canada let summoning Tuesday tomorrow of declare I ; , the chosen Excellency of the this fit
 let to present fit Commons 1997 Excellency House Tuesday o ; Parliament have shall , General of this of declare Governor thirty the that ' not command - the tomorrow clock hour according causes declare at chosen you in his Excellency does Parliament Canada the see , September of summoning to have until his the , the causes will it . of law Speaker I , , 23 His a in know but afternoon of the calling , been His two the to of
 summoning of ' Excellency see of command to I , His tomorrow of at the hour let - his o 23 1997 Speaker the does two Commons Parliament Parliament have , His causes Tuesday of ; to fit calling House law , the been , a the Canada present you shall his , in not but General causes to it clock Excellency until Governor the have of thirty according September in the know . declare afternoon of chosen declare the will , that this
 of in according September his Parliament 23 fit declare Governor House Excellency will , to shall Commons that law this in thirty have present the of been His , tomorrow , hour command the Parliament know a causes see , clock two you His at ' - until calling the o the Canada the declare to but let , 1997 of causes I does chosen of Tuesday . the not have to of afternoon , of General Excellency his ; it the Speaker summoning
 clock of the have at but know shall declare , afternoon the o ; that hour , declare Speaker tomorrow 1997 two the His to House calling will 23 his thirty Excellency chosen , to summoning causes the . command September Excellency been Canada law this the , according - causes to , until ' Tuesday present General let in Parliament of of Governor Commons in see his does , it you of a I have not the of of fit the His Parliament
 been have at the summoning , command the hour Parliament Excellency of I . but thirty declare the it present 1997 that clock ' - Tuesday , in the Canada the , of two Parliament until Excellency fit o causes the House ; a , of of law see chosen tomorrow to 23 , according September the does not know , will to his shall His to you General this let of afternoon in have His calling Governor Speaker his of declare causes Commons
 the Commons the his tomorrow , Speaker at Excellency law will have the the hour September chosen fit shall the Tuesday the it , of 23 declare been two see thirty of of clock in his a House until Parliament to . , does not Excellency that have causes present Governor o I in His - declare His calling of to summoning you of ; ' the Canada , know afternoon according let , this Parliament command General of , 1997 causes to but
 His his Excellency the , but his to two thirty September does , of hour command ' the the know been causes House this shall Excellency causes let , the to of of , will Parliament declare tomorrow it according that at have until . of Canada - a clock the the Commons have not Governor in I fit in , see Parliament calling General to Tuesday o chosen law , Speaker 23 ; of present you afternoon 1997 the His summoning of declare
 declare September chosen Commons the of present in Parliament at law Speaker the summoning have His this the until command o I House ' 1997 will fit , to Canada his know but . been two have in , thirty a the of of to clock Tuesday of , causes Excellency General , afternoon that the see 23 - causes shall Excellency hour his of of Parliament to , you Governor not it let the , according does ; calling the His declare tomorrow
 have Excellency declare been to causes o fit at calling his , His Speaker the the declare you ' Parliament the , I - let Canada House a does it have present of . 23 Commons of his will two that in causes ; know of command of chosen , the according General September law 1997 to this hour thirty , Parliament the , see of the to until but afternoon clock the of , Excellency summoning not Governor Tuesday tomorrow shall in His
 not of according 1997 ; summoning this his that 23 Tuesday command thirty two Parliament law to , the shall , it in , - have of the chosen until his see General does House . tomorrow calling the to will the o declare of of causes afternoon , causes clock ' been His Governor know , the I Parliament September of hour Excellency to in fit the have Speaker Canada His at the Commons of , but Excellency you let a present declare
 His will Excellency let Governor Parliament , to command shall to - but the his Commons until two the fit been 1997 present the General . in Tuesday have , does know of at declare , , House I , his of clock Parliament Excellency that causes o declare 23 chosen afternoon have of law you to hour causes thirty of tomorrow ; His , September summoning in Canada a this the ' see Speaker calling of the of according the not it the
 House , ; clock been Speaker according of chosen , Excellency of to his this 1997 the tomorrow command General to of you Governor his the , Canada summoning calling . Parliament afternoon does let the a His to hour I o shall two fit causes declare the have that see in will thirty declare September at until not the His it , , - , law of ' of the Parliament causes present Excellency have in of the know Tuesday but 23 Commons
Senator Gigantès :
You are reading from the wrong script.  
Senator Taylor :
It is obvious that my honourable friend does not have any notes.  
Senator Tkachuk :
I think I am getting to honourable senators opposite.  
I was told by the Honourable Senator Kirby that members opposite would only have one speaker on this issue. 
I have a feeling that we may hear from a few more senators after I and other senators point out some of the weaknesses in Bill C-2.  
Honourable senators, I would reiterate that this is not a pension program: this is a payroll tax! 
In the past, it harboured cheap loans for provinces, and it will harbour a $100-billion fund that will grow to a $1-trillion fund. 
Honourable senators, we will not need to pay the price. 
We will be long gone before the young people who starting out now, and who expect a pension plan when they grow old, will reap the benefits of what we sow today.  
Honourable senators on this side and honourable senators on the other side, I do not know why you would want to rush this bill. 
What is in it for you? 
What is in it for the Minister of Finance? 
What is in it for anyone to rush this bill through Parliament by December 19? 
No reasonable explanation has been given to me, and I am sure no reasonable explanation has been given to my honourable friends, other than the PMO, Mr. Goldenberg and Mr. Martin, telling you to pass this bill by December 19. 
They are telling you not to think about the consequences, because they are right. 
How do we know they are right? 
Why not take more time, honourable senators?  
 I have it in command to let you know that His Excellency the Governor General not see fit to declare the causes of his summoning the present Parliament of Canada until a Speaker of the House of Commons shall have been chosen , according to law ; but tomorrow , Tuesday , September 23 , 1997 , at the hour of two - thirty o ' clock in the afternoon , His Excellency will declare the causes of his calling this Parliament .
 , tomorrow , that you does causes declare Speaker declare General in , a been at the the clock thirty will shall His , ' of see of of I his the of two Parliament to . fit calling have in the according Excellency the the summoning o until Parliament of Tuesday but 1997 let Governor Commons this to chosen hour his - afternoon Canada of , causes to not it ; command 23 present Excellency know House have September , the His
 Canada September of in His - two clock thirty let o of fit , General Parliament will afternoon calling declare not the of Excellency have to it to , law . until his does this hour Commons the according been the shall see a present causes Speaker the of the , , causes to the 23 ; tomorrow ' Excellency Parliament command his 1997 of Tuesday at have House in declare that Governor know His summoning chosen I of you , , the
 , to law have o , have ' afternoon know Commons declare ; Parliament shall at the the the tomorrow of causes Parliament His two his thirty , will present causes September a chosen in it Speaker in of , not Excellency according the of calling fit you General 1997 Canada declare command the House this his - hour summoning of I , to see . been clock 23 that Governor to of but of let the His the until Excellency does Tuesday
The House of Commons withdrew.  
 withdrew House Commons . of The
 of The withdrew Commons House .
 The House . of Commons withdrew
 The . of withdrew House Commons
 . The Commons House of withdrew
 Commons The of withdrew House .
 of Commons The withdrew . House
 of House withdrew The . Commons
 Commons withdrew House of The .
 of The House withdrew . Commons
 Commons withdrew The . of House
 Commons The House withdrew . of
 House The Commons withdrew . of
 House Commons The of withdrew .
 The withdrew Commons of . House
 of Commons . House withdrew The
However, it was another increased cost to what should be a pension plan. 
The government should have taken the money out of something else, or increased the amount of CPP premiums so that people were told the truth, and also told, "To pay for this it will cost you 10 cents or 20 cents more a month." 
The cash was there, so they used that cash.  
Legislation was enacted for spousal credits. 
When people get divorced, they have to keep up with the times. 
They can split the benefits. 
That was not done before. 
At the inception of this program, that was not allowed.  
Because men die earlier and women live longer, the money went mostly to women. 
It costs more money. 
I am not saying that is bad. 
I am just saying that all of a sudden it costs more money because women are either lucky or live better or cleaner lives than men, and they live longer.  
Senator Gigantès :
They survive us. 
It takes strength and intelligence.  
Senator Moore :
Meaning we are not intelligent?  
Senator Gigantès :
Not as much as the women are.  
Senator Tkachuk :
 The of Commons withdrew .
 . withdrew Commons of House
 withdrew The Commons House of
 . House of Commons withdrew
The Honourable the Deputy of His Excellency the Governor General was pleased to retire.  
 The of Deputy His General Governor was . the to Honourable pleased Excellency the retire
 of the retire Governor the His Excellency Honourable was Deputy The to . pleased General
 retire was pleased of to General Governor Honourable the the The Deputy Excellency . His
 pleased . The Governor Deputy retire the the of General His to Honourable Excellency was
 pleased was . The His the General Governor the Excellency to Deputy Honourable retire of
 The General the retire of to His pleased Deputy Governor Excellency the . was Honourable
 the to retire was Governor the His pleased . of General Honourable The Deputy Excellency
 The the Governor to was Honourable Excellency General Deputy pleased the His . retire of
 pleased Honourable Governor the General Deputy of retire to The Excellency was . His the
 . His retire Excellency pleased General of The Deputy was to the Governor Honourable the
 Honourable was Deputy to . Governor the of General the pleased His Excellency retire The
 was to . His pleased the The of Honourable Governor Deputy the Excellency retire General
 the General Honourable His of Governor retire Deputy the . was Excellency The to pleased
 Excellency His General the pleased the was retire The Honourable of Deputy to Governor .
 . to pleased His Governor The General retire Excellency was of Deputy the the Honourable
 to Excellency Deputy pleased Honourable the Governor . retire of General the The was His
The regulations governing investments and the behaviour of administrators have not been revealed. 
They are not ready. 
What guidelines will there be for administrators? 
A parliamentary review is therefore vital before their implementation.  
In concluding, I would say to the government that the preferable alternative to its bill would be to simply oblige everyone in the labour force in Canada to invest a percentage of their savings in funds under private management or let government assume its role by providing a safety net for those who could not set aside enough money for their old age.  
Here is an intelligent response to the challenge before us. 
However, and it is regrettable in this era of the welfare state, it seems to me that we prefer to make sweeping rules that apply to everyone in order to resolve the problem of a few.  
Hon. Philippe Deane Gigantès :
You talk with admiration of private investment management. 
How do you explain the disaster at Olympia & York, for example, under the management of Mr. Eyton, our colleague, and the fact that major players like Conrad Black closed Dominion Stores and took the money Dominion Stores employees had invested in a pension fund, a fund they never drew from? 
Are you telling us that the private sector will be more generous and wise than the Caisse de dépôt in Quebec? 
Senator Bolduc :
I did not say disasters did not happen in the private sector. 
Senator Gigantès :
It is not a big deal if you have $3 million, but it is if you lose $35,000 or $70,000 and this is all the money you have. 
It may not be a big deal for you, but it is for small investors.  
Senator Bolduc :
Honourable senators, I never said there would not be any damage in the private sector. 
Some damage is done every day. 
But it is the private sector. 
 The Honourable the Deputy of His Excellency the Governor was pleased to retire .
 pleased was the to General The of Honourable Excellency retire Deputy Governor the His
 Deputy retire Excellency to Governor Honourable His of The pleased . was the General
 Honourable of Deputy . General was retire to the Governor pleased the The His
The sitting of the Senate was resumed.  
 of The was sitting the Senate resumed .
 of the . Senate The was resumed sitting
 resumed sitting of . Senate The was the
 the resumed Senate was of . sitting The
 . of Senate resumed sitting The the was
 the was The Senate sitting . of resumed
 the was . of sitting resumed The Senate
 Senate the The resumed was . of sitting
 sitting of Senate the The resumed was .
 was The of . sitting Senate the resumed
 was The the . resumed sitting of Senate
 resumed was Senate the of sitting . The
 resumed was . Senate of the sitting The
 The resumed was . sitting of Senate the
 resumed the sitting was of Senate The .
 the was The . resumed sitting Senate of
That is not my question.  
Senator Grafstein :
I assume that if they choose to proceed, they can. 
However, why should we in the Senate allow any province to proceed in a way that we consider unlawful? 
If there is an amendment to the Constitution, each senator in his or her heart and mind, after reviewing the testimony, must come to a conclusion. 
He or she can either vote for, against or abstain from the vote on the resolution.  
They want to be under the law, as does the Province of Newfoundland. 
They want to be under the Constitution. 
If they meet the standards of a constitutional change, I, for one, will support them, notwithstanding the fact that I mistrust their motivation and mistrust what they say. 
However, on matter of dealing with the rule of law, I am bound by the rule of law.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
My question has nothing to do with that answer. 
It was renewed in 1982 and given protection from the Charter. 
Quebec has finally adopted a linguistic school system that looks very promising and can be implemented without section 93 being amended, unlike Newfoundland, which needs an amendment to Term 17 to be able to implement a non-denominational system. 
The two resolutions are completely different in content and intent.  
Again, my question relates to the fact that the new linguistic school board process is well under way. 
There will be elections to the boards in June. 
What impact does the modification of section 93 or the non-modification of section 93 have on what is already under way?  
Senator Grafstein :
Again, honourable senators, there are two solitudes here. 
 The of the Senate was resumed .
 of Senate . The resumed was sitting
 of was Senate . resumed the The
 . the Senate The was resumed sitting
COMMUNICATION FROM GOVERNMENT HOUSE 
 GOVERNMENT HOUSE FROM COMMUNICATION
 GOVERNMENT HOUSE FROM COMMUNICATION
 HOUSE FROM COMMUNICATION GOVERNMENT
 COMMUNICATION HOUSE FROM GOVERNMENT
 FROM COMMUNICATION GOVERNMENT HOUSE
 GOVERNMENT FROM HOUSE COMMUNICATION
 HOUSE GOVERNMENT COMMUNICATION FROM
 COMMUNICATION FROM GOVERNMENT HOUSE
 GOVERNMENT COMMUNICATION HOUSE FROM
 COMMUNICATION FROM GOVERNMENT HOUSE
 FROM COMMUNICATION HOUSE GOVERNMENT
 COMMUNICATION HOUSE FROM GOVERNMENT
 HOUSE FROM GOVERNMENT COMMUNICATION
 FROM HOUSE GOVERNMENT COMMUNICATION
 COMMUNICATION HOUSE GOVERNMENT FROM
 HOUSE FROM COMMUNICATION GOVERNMENT
Finally, representatives of the Government of Quebec were invited to attend, which they did, together with members of the opposition. 
They appeared before the committee so that this point and other questions could be addressed.  
Members of the committee were pleased when the Minister of Education, Madame Marois, and the Minister of Federal-Provincial Affairs, Mr. Brassard, accepted our invitation to appear.  
Minister Brassard repeated the well-worn, often-repeated, proposition that no Quebec government will feel bound to recognize the 1982 Constitution. 
Minister Brassard then acknowledged, almost in the same breath, that under the law of the land, under the Supreme Court of Canada, the Province of Quebec was indeed bound by the Constitution Act, 1982. 
This is now clear and unequivocal.  
Clearly and fairly, the Province of Quebec deems itself bound by the 1982 Constitution. 
On the testimony received and based on my personal review, I concluded that the federal government indeed had the power under the 1982 Constitution, section 43, to accede to Quebec's request.  
That Parliament should or would exercise such power was obviously a much more difficult question. 
We recognize, under our Constitution, the nature of the exclusivity of this aspect of education under the Constitution as a provincial matter. 
This question, in pith and substance, is a matter of provincial education within the powers of the Province of Quebec. 
Then, honourable senators, came the more complicated problem alluded to by Senators Wood, Pitfield, Bolduc, Lavoie-Roux and Kirby and Lynch-Staunton, namely, how to determine whether or not, as defenders of the Constitution, we in the Senate could satisfy ourselves that there was a majority of the so-called "minorities" affected by any proposed diminution of their rights or privileges. 
All senators agree that one of our paramount duties in the Senate is to safeguard the Constitution and the rights of the minorities under that Constitution.  
I shall now turn to the essence of section 93, which is called by some commentators, a "Pocket Bill of Rights." 
That is a misnomer.  
In essence, section 93 is a series of privileges rather than full rights. 
Clearly, this is not the case here. 
Section 93 has yet another substantial problem which further diminished and minimized one's ability to define the subsections as containing full rights. 
On its face, these privileges, or limited rights, pertain only to the geography of the city of Montreal and Quebec City at the date of Confederation and beyond, into the province, to the privileges or rights of dissentient Roman Catholic and Protestant denominational school boards.  
Therefore, it is so difficult for me to understand how the subsections of 93 can be considered full rights. 
 FROM GOVERNMENT HOUSE
 GOVERNMENT FROM COMMUNICATION
 HOUSE FROM COMMUNICATION
 COMMUNICATION GOVERNMENT HOUSE
The Hon. the Speaker:
 : The the Hon Speaker .
 Hon Speaker the . The :
 . : Hon Speaker the The
 Hon : The Speaker the .
 Speaker Hon the The . :
 : The Speaker the Hon .
 . The Hon the : Speaker
 . The : Speaker the Hon
 . The Speaker : Hon the
 Hon The the . : Speaker
 the Speaker Hon The . :
 the The Hon Speaker : .
 The . Hon the Speaker :
 Hon The . the Speaker :
 . The the Speaker : Hon
 . : The Hon Speaker the
Students will continue to take religion courses or to receive pastoral animation or religious care and guidance services if they so desire.  
Before the end of the third year after the linguistic school boards are in place, the schools will be asked to consult the parents and decide whether or not they wish to maintain their confessional status.  
Those unfamiliar with Catholic and Protestant school boards in Montreal and Quebec City should know that in many cases, particularly in the Protestant system, it is the language of instruction which predominates. 
Many schools have little, if any, religious content, while in others it is very strong. 
Parents already have a say in how much religion they want their children exposed to and that will continue under the new system.  
While section 93 guarantees are only a matter of religious denominations, the essential characteristics of the resulting Quebec school system have, nonetheless, been linguistic. 
One does not speak often of going to a Catholic or Protestant school any more. 
One usually speaks of going to a French or an English school. 
It was inevitable, then, that the committee would be drawn into a debate on how the amendment of section 93 might affect linguistic rights, particularly those claimed by the minority.  
While section 23 of the Charter establishes minority linguistic education rights, Quebec is not bound by all its provisions and so has adopted legislation in this field which, in effect, creates two classes of English-speaking Quebecers as it distinguishes between those educated in Canada and those educated elsewhere. 
Only those parents educated in English in Canada can pass on the benefit of minority English language education to their children. 
Those Quebec parents who were educated in English outside of Canada must have their children educated in French. 
We have in Quebec two classes of English-speaking Quebecers.  
Quebec has been repeatedly criticized for this discrimination, and rightly so. 
How this undesirable situation developed can be traced to the then Minister of Justice, who is Prime Minister today.  
I will quote from his book, Straight from the Heart , where Mr. Chrétien describes how he was responsible for exempting Quebec from the crucial parts of section 23. 
He says: 
During the weeks that followed, I continued to try to overcome Quebec's objections, to the extent of modifying the principle of minority language education and agreeing to fiscal compensation when Quebec opted out of amendments that affected culture and education. 
That required a hell of a lot of selling to Trudeau, but he went along in the end, as did the nine other premiers, who were willing to reopen their sealed bargain in order to bring in Quebec. 
Mr. Chrétien goes on to say: 
 Hon . the Speaker :
 Hon : . The the
 Speaker Hon : . the
 The the Speaker Hon .
Honourable senators, I have the honour to inform the Senate that I have received a communication from Government House which reads as follows: 
 Senate honour received Government follows as I that Honourable , reads which I to have senators House the communication the : a have from inform
 Honourable senators follows as reads that honour , from the communication have I a : which to I received have the inform Senate Government House
 senators from I Honourable a Senate inform the House Government received have : as I , have which the to honour communication reads that follows
 communication which have to honour : reads received Senate that senators inform Government Honourable I from House follows the the I as , have a
 senators the , honour : communication as Government have inform I have that reads Honourable which to received I House follows Senate the a from
 from that as a which reads have the inform , I follows honour Government senators Senate I : Honourable received have to the House communication
 a communication : reads Government senators the received that Honourable inform honour to follows I , I have the from House which have as Senate
 Government honour have I I inform to have Honourable House : Senate reads senators a as received communication the which , follows from that the
 the senators , I as which House communication that the a received Honourable honour to from follows have reads : have Senate inform I Government
 the communication have : senators a as that reads follows the have inform which received I I Honourable , House to from honour Government Senate
 have , Senate inform that communication Honourable House a the have I the honour from : senators to received which as follows Government reads I
 communication to received senators I as have reads have inform Senate honour which House I that Honourable a : Government from follows , the the
 communication Honourable the I have follows the to that House , Government have from a honour I received : inform reads as senators Senate which
 a inform the have as Government I : honour from which reads , communication have House that Honourable Senate senators the I follows received to
 , as have reads honour Honourable follows : communication the senators a have received inform that I from to House Senate I which the Government
 I : have honour which I received have as Honourable the , that inform Senate communication a the Government to follows senators from House reads
Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration 
Seventh Report of Committee Presented 
Hon. Bill Rompkey , Chair of the Standing Committee on Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration, presented the following report: 
Tuesday, December 9, 1997 
The Standing Committee on Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration has the honour to present its 
SEVENTH REPORT 
Your Committee notes the attendance record of Senator Thompson and recommends that, effective immediately: 
Senator Thompson's use of the Senate resources ordinarily made available to him for the carrying out of his parliamentary functions, including funds, goods, services and premises, be suspended; 
2. Senator Thompson's allowances for travel and telecommunications expenses be suspended, with the exception of his expenses for travel between his place of residence in Ontario and the Senate in Ottawa; and 
3. Senator Thompson may apply in person to have this decision varied to the Standing Committee on Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration, which the Committee has the authority to do.  
Your Committee, in conjunction with the Standing Committee on Privileges, Standing Rules and Orders, is continuing to study this issue.  
Respectfully submitted, 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this report be taken into consideration?  
On motion of Senator Rompkey, report placed on the Orders of the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate.  
ADJOURNMENT 
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58(1) h ), I move, seconded by the Honourable Senator De Bané: 
That when the Senate adjourns today, it do stand adjourned until tomorrow, Wednesday, December 10, 1997, at 1:30 p.m. 
The Hon. the Speaker :
 Honourable senators , I have the honour to inform the Senate that I have received a communication from Government which reads as follows :
 follows from House I Senate I inform a senators communication as reads Government : which have Honourable the , that received have to the
 honour a Government , the have I Honourable House from Senate follows reads as I to that have inform senators received the : which
 as Government from , inform have which received I : to have the the that Honourable House honour communication a senators Senate I follows
September 22, 1997 
 1997 22 September ,
 22 September 1997 ,
 22 , September 1997
 22 1997 September ,
 22 , 1997 September
 22 September 1997 ,
 22 September 1997 ,
 September , 1997 22
 1997 September 22 ,
 22 , 1997 September
 September 22 1997 ,
 , September 22 1997
 September 1997 22 ,
 , 1997 22 September
 September , 22 1997
 September , 22 1997
Sixteen Members of the House of Commons, and seven Senators, were named to this Special Joint Committee. 
Some of those Senators have stated that their participation in the Committee must in no way be seen as absolving them, or their Senate colleagues, from the Senate's constitutional obligation to assess any amendment proposed to the Constitution of Canada.  
I am already hearing cries of alarm from those who will claim that the Senate, by adopting this attitude, will cause a delay which could compromise the reforms the Government of Quebec has in mind. 
I would like to remind those with such concerns that the reforms are already happening, are far advanced even, and do not need amendment of section 93 to reach their conclusion.  
The amendment to section 93 will do away with the confessional school boards and the dissentient boards only, and these will have to stay in place until the end of the current academic year early next summer.  
Hence the argument that it is essential for Parliament to make a decision before the end of the year has no justification.  
I hope that honourable senators will not be taken in by the specious argument that the sooner we approve the resolution, the more we will show how well the federation works. 
That is a sentiment which was trumpeted ad nauseum by government supporters following the adoption of the resolution in the other place. 
It is a sentiment which is certainly not shared by members of the Quebec government. 
Constitutional amendments affect all Canadians, even if their immediate impact is felt in only one region of the country. 
They must not be treated lightly, particularly as they affect minorities. 
The federation's value lies in this country's historic respect for the individuality of minorities and for their desire not to have this individuality crushed by the numerical weight of the majority.  
What we are being asked to do in the final analysis is remove constitutionally guaranteed rights, as discriminatory as they may be by today's standards, and entrust them to a province which will honour them for a given period, with no guarantee that they will be incorporated on a permanent basis. 
The National Assembly has endorsed this unanimously, as did most witnesses who stayed with the issue, with varying degrees of enthusiasm. 
Prominent legal experts even argued that various Supreme Court decisions have interpreted section 93 in such a way that it has lost much of its significance.  
All this may be true, but there are still Quebecers who feel that by adopting the resolution they will be abandoned by the very Parliament whose responsibility it is to protect them.  
I wish to end my remarks by quoting from an opinion which was given to the Quebec government by what is known as the Catholic Committee of the Education Council of the province of Quebec, a consultative body which is asked to give its views on issues affecting the Catholic religion in schools. 
This opinion was written and delivered following the hearings of the joint committee. 
It is very pertinent that we are all aware of them.  
I wish to quote from four paragraphs, and I am not quoting them out of context, as the sentiment in the four paragraphs I will quote reflect the tone of the entire paper. 
 September , 1997
 22 September ,
 1997 September 22
 22 , September
Sir, 
 , Sir
 , Sir
 , Sir
 , Sir
 , Sir
 , Sir
 Sir ,
 , Sir
 Sir ,
 Sir ,
 Sir ,
 , Sir
 , Sir
 , Sir
 , Sir
 Sir ,
I shall now turn to the essence of section 93, which is called by some commentators, a "Pocket Bill of Rights." 
That is a misnomer.  
In essence, section 93 is a series of privileges rather than full rights. 
Clearly, this is not the case here. 
Section 93 has yet another substantial problem which further diminished and minimized one's ability to define the subsections as containing full rights. 
On its face, these privileges, or limited rights, pertain only to the geography of the city of Montreal and Quebec City at the date of Confederation and beyond, into the province, to the privileges or rights of dissentient Roman Catholic and Protestant denominational school boards.  
Therefore, it is so difficult for me to understand how the subsections of 93 can be considered full rights. 
They could be considered privileges for geographically defined and certain narrowly cast denominational groups.  
Notwithstanding this difficulty, I still considered we had a responsibility to examine whether these groups, said to be affected by these privileges or narrow rights or attenuated rights, agreed with their substitution - not their diminishment or removal - for the architecture of denominational access now afforded under the provisions of Quebec educational laws. 
I say "substitution" because, while the constitutional provisions were being attenuated, denominational rights had previously been incorporated in the Quebec Education Bill 109 and its predecessors leading to that bill. 
There is a clear, overwhelming consensus for citizens in the province of Quebec to maintain a form, some form, of denominational teaching within their school system architecture.  
It is equally clear that there was an overwhelming consensus with few dissents throughout every segment of Quebec for renovating the Quebec school system into two linguistic streams, two linguistic boards, English and French. 
There is no question whatsoever in my mind, based on the evidence that I heard.  
Now we come to the more difficult question confronting members of the committee - to determine if there was a "majority" of the so-called "minorities" affected or given these denominational privileges.  
Even here, we had difficulty in definition. 
Notwithstanding that, we still treated that majority as if it were a minority.  
I will not repeat Senator Stewart's questions yesterday about section 93 and its limited scope, but I commend all students of the Constitution to examine section 93 and see how even the subsections of section 93, in so far as that section pertains to the province of Quebec, are much narrower in its scope than is clearly understood or debated in this Senate chamber. 
I will not go into that aspect of this debate. 
It would take half an hour, but I would be pleased to do so privately with any senator who is interested.  
The evidence we heard was extensive, definitive and clear. 
 Sir
 ,
 ,
 ,
I have the honour to inform you that Their Excellencies, the Governor General and Mrs. Diana Fowler LeBlanc, will arrive at the Peace Tower at 14:30 p.m. on Tuesday, the 23rd day of September, 1997.  
 at Their the 1997 . . 30 , arrive Tuesday and LeBlanc Mrs at that , Governor honour you 23rd the September : inform to . Peace Fowler on the Diana I will m General p have Tower day , , Excellencies of the 14 .
 Diana 23rd at m inform the Excellencies Peace of p 1997 arrive , , . the the 14 . . the honour Tuesday , : September , day . 30 to Fowler Their Tower at Mrs and on have you I that will LeBlanc General Governor
 . to the . . 14 1997 30 will Diana and : General of day Governor Mrs Excellencies , , the 23rd Their honour LeBlanc I , on you Peace m that at . the p Fowler Tuesday arrive have inform September the Tower , at
 30 Tuesday the . . the Governor Peace : Fowler will to 1997 23rd 14 September , arrive Tower I and honour day inform , General have . LeBlanc you . at the of , at , Mrs Excellencies on that p Diana m Their the
 the you of , , honour LeBlanc 14 September : and on Tower . . , Diana at will Governor 23rd I day m the the . to p , that Mrs arrive Their 30 Fowler have Tuesday . General Peace Excellencies the at inform 1997
 30 : I Excellencies , and Their Mrs Peace the honour the , 14 to m at , Tower . LeBlanc 1997 , that p . Tuesday Governor General will the . 23rd on arrive the . have Diana inform September at of you day Fowler
 day . you Excellencies General . Tuesday Their will of p , Tower Mrs September on the inform 30 Peace have Governor : m arrive Fowler . LeBlanc the 14 to 23rd the . 1997 , at honour that at , the , and I Diana
 day Diana the of the September : arrive Excellencies the that at Their Fowler General have Governor 14 , p Tuesday . on honour 1997 , m will Mrs . to and the I LeBlanc inform Peace , 30 . . at , you Tower 23rd
 . 1997 , 30 Mrs LeBlanc arrive at you Diana 23rd Fowler . . Tower p Their Peace of Governor inform 14 the will September Tuesday at the the day I General : , honour , the Excellencies . to and , on m that have
 Tower 1997 General Diana the Peace honour 30 Tuesday m : will LeBlanc Their . the . , the and you that Governor on Mrs Excellencies , I September . . arrive to inform at at , p day Fowler 14 the have of 23rd ,
 General day Tuesday . Tower of Their . at Diana September 30 the honour arrive and , Mrs the inform 14 I will m have , on LeBlanc Fowler , . p Excellencies 23rd that you Governor 1997 , the . to the : at Peace
 Excellencies the p the . and Mrs Governor , LeBlanc will have 30 you 1997 Their 14 . , Diana General at at , Fowler on the : that honour Peace of day arrive 23rd to Tuesday I . . , inform Tower the m September
 , : . arrive Diana Governor of the have inform , on the , LeBlanc the Mrs September . I p 1997 will honour Their m 23rd at 30 . General Tower , and at day the 14 to Fowler Excellencies that Tuesday you . Peace
 at , Tuesday Tower . the the , . September at on of 30 day 14 p Peace inform , : will Their , 1997 arrive LeBlanc to you . honour General Governor m Mrs I have Excellencies and that 23rd Diana the Fowler the .
 1997 of honour . September Diana the 30 Fowler Peace . have 23rd LeBlanc General : Governor day inform Their will to m Mrs on , you p Tower arrive I Tuesday , and 14 the that . the at the , at . Excellencies ,
 General LeBlanc inform day Tuesday the : the 30 on . the . you Their arrive Tower will . at I Diana 1997 , of to 14 and Excellencies . at Fowler September , that 23rd Governor Peace m , the , honour have p Mrs
They questioned linguistic rights and suggested that denominational guarantees established by 107 be maintained. 
There was a caveat there that my honourable friend forgot to read.  
Senator Grafstein :
I find myself in great difficulty defending Roman Catholic theology let alone letters from Roman Catholic archbishops. 
I will leave it to each senator to come to his or her own conclusion on the testimony and on the letters, which are appended to the report.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Honourable senators, Senator Grafstein is quite right in stating that reform is needed. 
Actually, reform is well under way in Quebec. 
The new system, it seems, will be in place for the next school year. 
New linguistic boards will be set up. 
There will be some difficulties, but, overall, it is proceeding quite well.  
What linkage is there between the new school system in Quebec and the request to exempt Quebec from certain obligations of section 93? 
I do not see any.  
Senator Grafstein :
Honourable senators, there is constitutional law. 
Quebec wants to proceed by the rule of law. 
They are seeking to renovate their system under the rule of law and the Constitution.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
That is not my question.  
Senator Grafstein :
 I have the honour to inform you that Their Excellencies , the Governor General and Mrs . Diana Fowler LeBlanc , will arrive at the Peace Tower at 14 30 p . m . on Tuesday , the 23rd day of September , 1997 .
 Tower : the inform . will , the you Governor have Fowler , 30 Their day the honour I 23rd the . and Peace . 14 September Excellencies m Tuesday at Diana of , to 1997 , that General Mrs . at LeBlanc p on
 at the have to of . that p , 23rd 30 : Peace and . Excellencies I will , Their the m Fowler Governor . 1997 the the Tuesday LeBlanc Diana Tower arrive you September . Mrs honour , , day 14 at General inform
 and on Diana at . 1997 of inform , day , September Tower Peace Fowler you . will . LeBlanc 30 . p I the , m the Governor Mrs arrive 23rd Their : that 14 the Tuesday General honour Excellencies the have at ,
When it has been indicated that all is in readiness, Their Excellencies will proceed to the Chamber of the Senate to formally open the First Session of the Thirty-Sixth Parliament of Canada.  
 indicated - Chamber Their Sixth Thirty the Parliament it all formally of to First the , in that has . of readiness of Excellencies will proceed been the Canada Session to open When is Senate the
 to the First indicated Their of to open of Excellencies Parliament Chamber it formally has in the Sixth Thirty that been Session Senate proceed . all of , readiness will When is Canada the the -
 the , Thirty that Parliament open Chamber has First Sixth of it Their - Excellencies . readiness will in is indicated Session Senate been the the of to all When of Canada to the formally proceed
 Their . to of open When will to Chamber of Thirty Excellencies proceed that readiness all of Session Parliament in the Senate the Canada Sixth is been , it - the the formally First indicated has
 has Their When of is Excellencies of proceed the to Chamber formally will all indicated First the the Senate that readiness . Thirty the Session it Sixth been of , Parliament in to Canada - open
 Senate . all been When proceed has that of open First the Parliament Chamber it , in indicated formally Session Their the the is to of will Excellencies Canada the Sixth to of readiness - Thirty
 Parliament will is Canada readiness the Senate to the . When of of that the been Excellencies of , Sixth proceed Session to has all Their it the formally open Thirty Chamber in - indicated First
 is First indicated Canada . Parliament to of the to When the readiness formally Their Sixth , the all will open of Excellencies Chamber - been Thirty the proceed in Session it has of that Senate
 Chamber Their to the - in been has of proceed all formally Excellencies Parliament of the Canada First open Session is Sixth to . the , Senate Thirty indicated readiness will When the that of it
 Senate Excellencies of will to - indicated of readiness When the Session First . Sixth to that is Thirty Canada of the the it Their proceed has the in been open , Parliament all formally Chamber
 Sixth open the When it been . all is Their has Thirty Canada readiness in formally , the the Session indicated Parliament the - of Excellencies to Chamber Senate that of will proceed of First to
 of the Senate that - When is of to Parliament it indicated Thirty Excellencies has all to Chamber , Canada Their in will formally of readiness Session proceed Sixth been open . the the First the
 , has of will that Canada all the open Senate is When . been to Their of Chamber Parliament the First to indicated Excellencies Session the proceed in - formally Sixth readiness it Thirty the of
 has the When Session . First Chamber - it Canada the Parliament Senate indicated of of is in formally of Sixth will proceed Excellencies that readiness to been the all Thirty open , the Their to
 the Session Chamber Canada it the all readiness Thirty Excellencies Parliament is the Sixth of . formally - of Senate the When has Their of been indicated in will First to that , proceed to open
 of Senate Sixth Session Parliament the of to will in - open . been Their proceed that First it to Thirty Excellencies , Canada indicated has the Chamber When readiness the is of all formally the
The first hurdle I had to overcome was whether or not the wording of the Quebec resolution on its face was so invidious, so egregious and so inconsistent that the recital made it inoperable and, in the process, would defeat its own request to amend the 1867 provisions by the mechanisms of the 1982 Constitution.  
I asked myself how the Province of Quebec could be asking for an amendment to the Constitution contained in the 1867 British North America Act, which was now part of the 1982 Constitution, while recognizing that the only methodology available to Parliament would be via the Constitution Act, 1982.  
Section 43 of the 1982 Constitution contains bilateral amendment processes between the federal government and provinces where their interests are solely engaged. 
Clearly, the only highway, the only path the Government of Quebec or the assembly of Quebec could take to achieve its objective was via the 1982 Constitution.  
Honourable senators, I then examined the federal resolution, which is the one we are being asked to consider. 
The federal resolution differs substantially from the Quebec resolutions. 
They are both appended to the report for your consideration.  
The federal resolution made reference not only to the 1982 Constitution, but to section 23 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedom incorporated in the Constitution Act, 1982.  
I concluded, after listening carefully to legal advice proffered before the committee, that the operative clause of any constitutional resolution was the wording of the amending clause itself. 
While recitals are of interest, while they are opinionated, while they are descriptive, they are not binding.  
Again, it was clear to me that the only way that the federal government could accede to the Quebec assembly's request was by utilizing the 1982 Constitution. 
The Government of Quebec knew this. 
We in Parliament knew this. 
Hence, I and others on the committee insisted that Quebec representatives be invited, despite reports we read in the press to the contrary, that the Quebec representatives would not attend at Ottawa.  
Finally, representatives of the Government of Quebec were invited to attend, which they did, together with members of the opposition. 
They appeared before the committee so that this point and other questions could be addressed.  
Members of the committee were pleased when the Minister of Education, Madame Marois, and the Minister of Federal-Provincial Affairs, Mr. Brassard, accepted our invitation to appear.  
Minister Brassard repeated the well-worn, often-repeated, proposition that no Quebec government will feel bound to recognize the 1982 Constitution. 
Minister Brassard then acknowledged, almost in the same breath, that under the law of the land, under the Supreme Court of Canada, the Province of Quebec was indeed bound by the Constitution Act, 1982. 
This is now clear and unequivocal.  
 When it has been indicated that all is in , Their Excellencies will proceed to the Chamber of the Senate to formally open the First Session of the Thirty - Sixth Parliament of Canada .
 Thirty readiness Senate the of the of Sixth Their to the been to , Session the Chamber has First will - in it When Parliament Canada Excellencies all proceed is open that . indicated of
 formally Thirty Senate Sixth of Parliament . - is been to Session all to indicated has Excellencies the it of the the in proceed of , Chamber the Canada will readiness open When that First
 to that all - in the the of readiness will it been Their Thirty Chamber Session proceed Sixth has When the formally of indicated . First the is Canada Parliament of Excellencies Senate , to
Yours sincerely, 
 sincerely Yours ,
 Yours , sincerely
 sincerely , Yours
 , sincerely Yours
 Yours , sincerely
 sincerely , Yours
 , sincerely Yours
 , Yours sincerely
 , sincerely Yours
 , Yours sincerely
 sincerely , Yours
 , sincerely Yours
 , Yours sincerely
 sincerely , Yours
 sincerely , Yours
 sincerely , Yours
Defence-Status of the Armoured Personnel Carrier Replacement Program 
Business of the Senate 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
Second Reading-Debate Continued 
Canada Cooperatives Bill 
First Reading 
Criminal Code 
Interpretation Act 
Bill to Amend-Second Reading-Motions in Amendment-Debate Adjourned to Await Ruling of Speaker 
Motion in Sub-Amendment 
Quebec 
Linguistic School Boards-Amendment to Section 93 of Constitution-Report of Special Joint Committee Adopted 
Quebec 
Linguistic School Boards-Motion to Amend Section 93 of Constitution-Debate Adjourned 
Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration 
Sixth Report of Committee Adopted 
Bill to Amend-First Reading 
Canada Marine Bill 
First Reading 
Aboriginal Peoples 
 sincerely ,
 sincerely ,
 Yours ,
 sincerely Yours
Secretary to the Governor General 
 the to Governor General Secretary
 the Governor to General Secretary
 to Secretary Governor the General
 the General Secretary to Governor
 General Governor Secretary to the
 Governor Secretary to the General
 the to Secretary General Governor
 Governor to the General Secretary
 General to Governor Secretary the
 Secretary to the General Governor
 to the General Secretary Governor
 the Governor General to Secretary
 General to the Governor Secretary
 General Governor to Secretary the
 Secretary Governor General the to
 the Secretary Governor to General
Agreed.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is it your pleasure, honourable senators, to adopt the motion?  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
Motion agreed to.  
The Senate 
Conduct of Business-Notice of Inquiry 
Hon. William M. Kelly :
Honourable senators, I give notice: 
That on Thursday next, December 11, 1997, I will call the attention of the Senate to the way in which the Senate conducts its business.  
QUESTION PERIOD 
Federal-Provincial Relations 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Province of Quebec-Request for Particulars 
Hon. Fernand Roberge :
Honourable senators, my question follows the announcement made yesterday regarding the government's decision to set at $12.5 billion the cash floor for transfer payments made under the Canada health and social transfer (CHST). 
The government would have us believe that this amount represents an increase in health care payments. 
However, the figures indicate otherwise.  
The following year, in 1999-2000, they will only be $3.748 billion. 
Yet, the government claimed yesterday that it was implementing a stable transfer system. 
 Secretary the Governor General
 Secretary the Governor General
 to the Secretary General
 Governor to Secretary the
The Honourable 
 The Honourable
 The Honourable
 Honourable The
 Honourable The
 The Honourable
 Honourable The
 The Honourable
 The Honourable
 Honourable The
 Honourable The
 Honourable The
 Honourable The
 The Honourable
 Honourable The
 The Honourable
 The Honourable
Honourable senators, that is a very good question. 
There is one thing in the bill that is very acceptable. 
The Auditor General will be able to look at the management of the Investment Board.  
As a result, there will be some accountability in the form of an audit. 
According to Mr. Massé's report, there are 85 to 90 different government organizations. 
This is all very interesting, but none of them will have as much money as the one we are talking about. 
We are talking about an annual amount on the order of 15 per cent to 20 per cent of Canada's gross national product. 
It is an enormous amount. 
I therefore think there has to be some sort of accountability, and one of the ways to achieve that is for parliamentarians to be involved in drafting the Auditor General's report; in my view, there should be an amendment along these lines, to guarantee that that is the case.  
Hon. Jerahmiel S. Grafstein :
Honourable senators, I have a brief question for Senator Bolduc. 
I believe the Caisse de Dépôt is the most powerful pension fund in Canada. 
What accountability does that fund have to the Canadian public?  
Senator Bolduc :
It has not very much accountability to the Canadian public. 
This has been discussed many times in Quebec City and last year, for the first time, they appeared before a parliamentary committee. 
This is a serious matter.  
Senator Grafstein :
Honourable senators, I do not question the issue of accountability. 
The problem is whether one would be able to obtain the very best people by the public process, the newspaper process or the media process, or whether the accountability process is better when governments, which are indirectly accountable, make those appointments and those nominated are then accountable to a parliamentary committee.  
 Honourable
 Honourable
 The
 Honourable
The Speaker of the Senate 
 the Speaker The Senate of
 The of Senate Speaker the
 The Senate the Speaker of
 Speaker Senate the of The
 Senate Speaker of The the
 of Senate Speaker the The
 of Speaker the Senate The
 The Senate of Speaker the
 Speaker of the Senate The
 the Speaker The of Senate
 Senate The the of Speaker
 the Speaker Senate The of
 The of Speaker the Senate
 The Speaker of Senate the
 Senate Speaker of The the
 the The of Senate Speaker
Business of the Senate 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
Second Reading-Debate Continued 
Canada Cooperatives Bill 
First Reading 
Criminal Code 
Interpretation Act 
Bill to Amend-Second Reading-Motions in Amendment-Debate Adjourned to Await Ruling of Speaker 
Motion in Sub-Amendment 
Quebec 
Linguistic School Boards-Amendment to Section 93 of Constitution-Report of Special Joint Committee Adopted 
Quebec 
Linguistic School Boards-Motion to Amend Section 93 of Constitution-Debate Adjourned 
Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration 
Sixth Report of Committee Adopted 
Bill to Amend-First Reading 
Canada Marine Bill 
First Reading 
Aboriginal Peoples 
Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples-Committee Authorized to Study Recommendations 
 The Speaker of Senate
 of The the Senate
 Senate Speaker the The
 The the Speaker of
Adjournment 
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
Hon. Mira Spivak :
Honourable senators, late last week, the consulting firm Informetrica released a study entitled, "The Scale of the Challenge for Reducing Canadian Greenhouse Gas Emissions." 
This report states: 
We conclude that there is almost no chance of meeting this goal in Canada under any reasonable economic scenario...  
And I stress this last part: 
...given current commitments to action.  
Could the Leader of the Government tell us if the relevant ministers are aware of this study, whether there have been any responses, or what the reaction has been to this prestigious firm's study?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
It provides very important data. 
I am not sure the government would necessarily agree with the findings of the study but, certainly, those findings will be taken into consideration.  
Senator Spivak :
I am glad to hear that.  
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Concept of Differing Targets-Government Position 
Hon. Mira Spivak :
In the current discussions in Kyoto, the idea of tailoring reductions targets to individual countries' economic and social profiles rather than having a one-size-fits-all commitment has gained some currency, particularly in view of the most recent American proposal. 
Where does the Canadian delegation stand with respect to this concept?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government):
Honourable senators, the media is reporting, of course, on a possible deal on targets and time-tables which could see Canada accepting a reduction of 5 per cent from 1990 levels bythe year 2010. 
At this point, these reports are speculative, but negotiations are ongoing.  
National Unity 




Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Acting Deputy Leader of the Government), with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58(1)( h ), moved: 
 of . 58 ), )( Leader Senate of moved 1 Hon Sharon rule the Acting Deputy and ), notwithstanding leave the ( Carstairs h ( with Government :
 Acting ( ( 58 with of ), moved Leader leave )( Hon h Sharon Government of Deputy 1 Carstairs Senate and : . rule notwithstanding the ), the
 Hon . h ), Government of Leader Sharon rule : 58 Carstairs notwithstanding with of Deputy ), leave )( 1 the the moved Senate and ( Acting (
 the with 1 : ( leave Leader ( of Acting ), notwithstanding Senate rule )( moved Sharon Deputy ), . Carstairs of 58 h and the Government Hon
 leave Hon Leader Carstairs ( ( the Sharon )( : 1 of Senate h notwithstanding the rule moved ), Government ), of Deputy and Acting . with 58
 Government notwithstanding leave Deputy Leader ), 58 of 1 moved : Hon of h with . Sharon ), Senate Carstairs Acting the rule ( and ( )( the
 58 leave Deputy notwithstanding the the Leader Sharon moved Senate rule Hon 1 . Acting of ), of with Government h : ( )( ), Carstairs ( and
 notwithstanding h and . with the Leader )( Government moved Carstairs ( rule ), Deputy ), leave Hon of : of 58 Senate the ( 1 Sharon Acting
 ( Leader the ), Hon 1 with )( notwithstanding ( Sharon Government leave Deputy moved the Acting Senate Carstairs . h of and : rule of 58 ),
 Sharon : ), Leader . Deputy 1 Acting and of rule with Senate Carstairs 58 ( ), leave the moved ( notwithstanding the Government Hon )( of h
 leave the Leader : 1 rule h Carstairs Government . ), Hon Sharon ( and the of of 58 with Senate moved ( notwithstanding ), Deputy Acting )(
 Government )( Hon Leader Carstairs the ), Acting h of . leave ( Deputy 1 : notwithstanding Senate moved Sharon of the with ( ), and rule 58
 )( Hon rule h of the leave ( and 1 of Sharon Government ( moved : Deputy Leader Carstairs ), Senate the . Acting ), notwithstanding with 58
 of 1 )( leave of 58 moved rule ( Leader Senate ), : and ), Acting the Government ( with Carstairs Hon . Sharon Deputy h the notwithstanding
 and Government the ( Deputy ), Senate )( the Sharon Leader 58 of moved of h Acting notwithstanding 1 Carstairs ), Hon rule ( . with leave :
 notwithstanding Government : rule the Leader 1 )( h 58 ), Acting ( Deputy ), Hon and moved Sharon of with Carstairs of ( . Senate the leave
However, in addition to the evidence, we did refer to opinion polls that seemed to suggest a strong support for reform along these lines.  
Yes, the resolution is imperfect. 
We would like to have done it "our way," as Frank Sinatra used to say, but we must deal with the Province of Quebec in this case. 
We had to bend imperfect tools to see whether they fit our minimum requirements. 
In my view, they did not fit our minimum requirements; they fit our reasonable requirements for constitutional amendment.  
Senator Wood :
Is it not true in the letter from the bishops of Quebec - the letter the honourable senator read - that they were in favour of repealing section 93? 
They questioned linguistic rights and suggested that denominational guarantees established by 107 be maintained. 
There was a caveat there that my honourable friend forgot to read.  
Senator Grafstein :
I find myself in great difficulty defending Roman Catholic theology let alone letters from Roman Catholic archbishops. 
I will leave it to each senator to come to his or her own conclusion on the testimony and on the letters, which are appended to the report.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Honourable senators, Senator Grafstein is quite right in stating that reform is needed. 
Actually, reform is well under way in Quebec. 
The new system, it seems, will be in place for the next school year. 
New linguistic boards will be set up. 
There will be some difficulties, but, overall, it is proceeding quite well.  
What linkage is there between the new school system in Quebec and the request to exempt Quebec from certain obligations of section 93? 
I do not see any.  
 Hon . Sharon Carstairs ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Government ), with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 )( h moved :
 ), 58 ( leave with ( the of )( . ), Leader 1 rule notwithstanding Senate moved Sharon of the Hon h Acting : Deputy Government and
 58 Government ( Deputy notwithstanding of ( Acting . : with ), 1 Senate Sharon and leave h )( rule moved Leader the Carstairs of ), Hon
 Hon ), of 58 )( h ( ( with Government Leader Deputy and the ), Senate rule leave of notwithstanding Sharon : the 1 Acting . Carstairs
That the Senate do now adjourn until tomorrow, Tuesday, September 23, 1997, at 11:00 a.m. 
 m until . a 11 , Tuesday , . That , do September the Senate now , : 00 at tomorrow adjourn 23 1997
 . 11 m 00 a now : , , adjourn at , Senate until tomorrow do 1997 , That the . September 23 Tuesday
 23 . That Tuesday adjourn , 1997 at September a until , m 00 . : the tomorrow now Senate do , 11 ,
 That m until at 00 1997 , Senate . Tuesday 11 September now adjourn tomorrow . do a : , , the 23 ,
 the at , , That do a Senate 1997 Tuesday adjourn . 00 23 tomorrow , now 11 . September m until : ,
 now : 1997 Tuesday 11 , Senate . the 00 until m 23 September , do at a adjourn . That , tomorrow ,
 1997 do , That tomorrow 11 now 23 adjourn Senate Tuesday , . . : the 00 at , m a September until ,
 That at now , Senate m tomorrow 23 until : 1997 , the do , adjourn September a 00 . . , Tuesday 11
 until 00 Senate , That the now 1997 tomorrow adjourn 11 at , . , m : September 23 . , a do Tuesday
 , do m 00 23 , 1997 adjourn . Senate until tomorrow September : . the 11 Tuesday at a That , , now
 , until 11 now . , a at , : do . Senate September 1997 , That 00 m 23 tomorrow adjourn Tuesday the
 do , September adjourn tomorrow now . 00 , 11 That 1997 : m at a Tuesday , , the . 23 Senate until
 11 23 a 1997 00 , . September , m at Senate adjourn , : Tuesday . tomorrow , the That until now do
 now : , 11 m until Tuesday 23 , , , a September 1997 the adjourn That 00 at . tomorrow . do Senate
 That do , . 1997 Tuesday Senate 11 tomorrow until , m adjourn September , . now : 23 the , at 00 a
 September the 1997 . a adjourn : until do , now Tuesday 11 at m , , 23 , That . tomorrow Senate 00
Delayed Answers to Oral Questions 
Human Resources Development 
Changes to Canada Pension Plan-Accountability and Transparency of Investment Board-Undertaking to Publish Quarterly Financial Statements-Government Position 
Changes to Canada Pension Plan-Investment Board Not Subject to Access to Information Act-Government Position 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
Commemoration of Fiftieth Anniversary-Plans of Government 
Activities planned around December 10, 1997 for the launch of the 50th Anniversary commemorative year of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) 
National Defence 
Lack of Helicopter for Number of Navy Frigates-Government Position 
Forestry 
Demolition of Government Laboratories-Possibility of Restoration of Funding-Government Position 
Answers to Order Paper Questions Tabled 
Energy-Department of the Environment-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Energy-Department of Justice-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Energy-Department of Multiculturalism-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Energy-Department of Natural Resources-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Defence-Status of Clothe the Soldier Project 
Defence-Status of the Armoured Personnel Carrier Replacement Program 
Business of the Senate 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 That the Senate do now adjourn until , Tuesday , September 23 , 1997 , at 11 : 00 a . m .
 do . m now at September 1997 tomorrow adjourn 23 a Senate , That , until : , , . 11 00 the
 That Tuesday : . now September at , 23 the , m . , adjourn Senate 00 a 1997 until , do tomorrow
 September 23 until a 00 , at , adjourn m tomorrow 1997 . That , now 11 Senate . the Tuesday , :
Motion agreed to.  
 . agreed Motion to
 . Motion to agreed
 . to agreed Motion
 Motion to . agreed
 to agreed . Motion
 Motion agreed . to
 to Motion . agreed
 agreed . Motion to
 to Motion agreed .
 agreed . to Motion
 to agreed Motion .
 . to Motion agreed
 to Motion agreed .
 . agreed to Motion
 Motion to . agreed
 Motion agreed . to
Hon. Michael A. Meighen :
Honourable senators, this is precisely where I wanted clarification. 
Are you recommending that the fund be divided into four $25-billion portions and that so many firms administer each $25-billion portion in its entirety? 
Or are you recommending that one firm be responsible for one sector, such as the real estate sector and another firm be responsible for another sector?  
Senator Bolduc :
Honourable senators, in my opinion, it could be by sector, but my preference would be for the total to be broken down into four portions covering a variety of investments. 
Otherwise, if you have a block of $25 or $30 billion in real estate, you know what that means. 
Senator Meighen :
You mentioned decentralizing the decision-making process, did you not? 
Do you see any advantage to having decision-making centres such as the firm handling the $25-billion segment being located in different parts of the country?  
Senator Bolduc :
In Quebec, when the problem came up in connection with the pension plan in 1966, we insisted on having our own plan. 
I am not saying that this is how it should be across Canada; that is not my point. 
What I am saying is that, in Quebec, at the time, Jean Lesage had made it very clear that the fund was designed to provide social security. 
That is why we fought so hard for the Caisse de dépôt et placement at the time: to have this flexibility.  
I am not saying this practice should be generalized and extended to Ontario or any other province; it may cause problems I had not thought of so far. 
There is no doubt that it could be more difficult for some provinces. 
I do not exclude however the idea that provincial politicians could bring pressure to bear on this organization so that, when investments are made, people from each region benefit. 
To what extent will ethics and conflict of interest rules be overlooked? 
My experience tells me and I can tell you that it is going to be complicated.  
 Motion agreed to
 . agreed Motion
 Motion . to
 to agreed .
The Senate adjourned until Tuesday, September 23, 1997 at 11:00 a.m. 
 at Tuesday : 1997 a . until 23 September Senate , The 11 , m adjourned . 00
 , September 00 , 23 Tuesday Senate until a 1997 . 11 : at The . adjourned m
 m 00 : adjourned at , 23 11 . , until The 1997 . Tuesday September Senate a
 adjourned : September until , m The 00 23 , Tuesday Senate . at a 11 . 1997
 The 11 23 , : at Tuesday 1997 00 . a adjourned until September Senate m . ,
 until The 1997 , . September a , m at 11 : Senate adjourned 23 Tuesday . 00
 , adjourned Senate at September Tuesday 23 00 until m 11 . The . 1997 a , :
 23 00 11 at until The . , . a September , adjourned 1997 m Tuesday : Senate
 September : Senate . Tuesday adjourned , 23 11 until . at 00 1997 , a The m
 Tuesday a . September adjourned 1997 The at until : 11 . 23 00 Senate , m ,
 The : 11 until Senate m , Tuesday 1997 , . a adjourned 23 00 . at September
 : Tuesday until . 1997 00 September adjourned m a at , 11 Senate , 23 . The
 00 a , 23 Senate . m . Tuesday until 11 The 1997 , : adjourned at September
 1997 at a until The September . 23 m 00 Tuesday : Senate 11 , , adjourned .
 until m Tuesday 1997 adjourned The : Senate a September 23 00 11 , , . . at
 . The 11 , : at adjourned Tuesday 00 September a , until Senate . 23 m 1997
Search and Rescue Helicopter Replacement Program-State of Sea King Helicopter Fleet-Government Position 
Federal-Provincial Relations 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Atlantic Provinces Equal to Increase in Social Transfers-Government Position 
Delayed Answers to Oral Questions 
Human Resources Development 
Changes to Canada Pension Plan-Accountability and Transparency of Investment Board-Undertaking to Publish Quarterly Financial Statements-Government Position 
Changes to Canada Pension Plan-Investment Board Not Subject to Access to Information Act-Government Position 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
Commemoration of Fiftieth Anniversary-Plans of Government 
Activities planned around December 10, 1997 for the launch of the 50th Anniversary commemorative year of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) 
National Defence 
Lack of Helicopter for Number of Navy Frigates-Government Position 
Forestry 
Demolition of Government Laboratories-Possibility of Restoration of Funding-Government Position 
Answers to Order Paper Questions Tabled 
Energy-Department of the Environment-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Energy-Department of Justice-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Energy-Department of Multiculturalism-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Energy-Department of Natural Resources-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Defence-Status of Clothe the Soldier Project 
 The Senate adjourned until , September 23 , 1997 at 11 : 00 a . m .
 m a until 1997 Senate 11 , Tuesday September , The adjourned 23 00 . : .
 The 11 at . m 00 a 23 , : until 1997 Tuesday September . , adjourned
 m Tuesday 00 , . adjourned : at a , Senate The September . 23 11 until
Debates of the Senate (Hansard) 
 Hansard ) of the Senate ( Debates
 Senate Hansard ( Debates ) of the
 Debates ( Hansard ) of the Senate
 the of Hansard ( Senate ) Debates
 Senate ) Debates the Hansard of (
 Debates Senate ( ) Hansard of the
 ( Senate of Debates ) Hansard the
 Debates Senate the ) Hansard of (
 ) Senate of Hansard ( Debates the
 Debates of Hansard ) Senate ( the
 the Hansard Senate ( of Debates )
 Debates ( ) the Senate Hansard of
 the Senate ) Debates Hansard of (
 the ( ) Hansard Senate of Debates
 Senate the ( Hansard ) Debates of
 Hansard ) Debates Senate ( of the
Telecommunications Act Teleglobe Canada Reorganization and Divestiture Act 
Bill to Amend-First Reading 
The Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C-17, to amend the Telecommunications Act and the Teleglobe Canada Reorganization and Divestiture Act. 
Bill read first time.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this bill be read the second time?  
On motion of Senator Carstairs, bill placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading on Thursday, December 11, 1997.  
Canada Marine Bill 
First Reading 
The Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C-9, for making the system of Canadian ports competitive, efficient and commercially oriented, providing for the establishing of port authorities and the divesting of certain harbours and ports, for the commercialization of the St. Lawrence Seaway and ferry services and other matters related to maritime trade and transport and amending the Pilotage Act and amending and repealing other Acts as a consequence.  
Bill read first time.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this bill be read the second time?  
On motion of Senator Carstairs, bill placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading on Thursday, December 11, 1997.  
Aboriginal Peoples 
Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples-Committee Authorized to Study Recommendations 
Hon. Charlie Watt , pursuant to notice of December 8, 1997, moved: 
That the Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal Peoples be authorized to examine and report upon the recommendations of the Royal Commission Report on Aboriginal Peoples (Sessional paper 2/35-508.) 
respecting Aboriginal governance and, in particular, seek the comments of Aboriginal peoples and of other interested parties on: 
2. the mechanisms of implementing such new structural relationships and; 
 Debates of the Senate Hansard )
 the Hansard of ) ( Debates
 ( Debates ) Senate of Hansard
 of ( Hansard Debates the Senate
1st Session, 36th Parliament, 
 , 36th Session , Parliament 1st
 36th Parliament Session , 1st ,
 36th , Parliament 1st , Session
 , Session Parliament , 36th 1st
 Session , Parliament 1st , 36th
 1st , Session , 36th Parliament
 36th Session Parliament , 1st ,
 , , 36th 1st Session Parliament
 1st 36th Session Parliament , ,
 Parliament , 1st 36th , Session
 , Parliament Session , 1st 36th
 36th Session , , Parliament 1st
 Session 36th , 1st , Parliament
 1st , 36th Session , Parliament
 Parliament , Session 36th 1st ,
 , , Session Parliament 1st 36th
The following year, in 1999-2000, they will only be $3.748 billion. 
Yet, the government claimed yesterday that it was implementing a stable transfer system. 
In fact, cash payments paid to Quebec for health and education will be reduced by over $300 million over a five-year period. 
Honourable senators, I remind you that these cuts are in addition to this year's reduction of $700 million compared to last year. 
Could the minister make inquiries and inform the Senate of the reasons why, in spite of a cash floor set at $12.5 billion, Quebec's share will diminish by $307 million over the next five years?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
The federal government cut its own spending earlier, more drastically and in greater measure than transfers to the provinces. 
The government has made it clear that it will use increased fiscal flexibility to make strategic investments in priority areas, and action was taken early and directly on that commitment based on favourable fiscal results that emerged this past spring.  
With respect to individual provinces, I do not have those numbers. 
However, I would be happy to provide them for my honourable friend.  
Senator Roberge :
Could the minister find out at the same time why, in the same time period, Ontario's share of the cash transfers will increase to $173 million?  
Senator Graham :
Yes. 
While I am doing that, I should like to remind the honourable senator that even before the federal government balances the books, it is putting more money into transfers to the provinces. 
In fact, the government is raising the cash floor from $11 billion to $12.5 billion, the single largest reinvestment made by the federal government. 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Provinces-Effect on Atlantic Provinces 
Hon. Mabel M. DeWare :
Honourable senators, my figures show that, four years ago, the provinces received more than $19 billion in cash transfers for health, education and welfare through what was then known as the Canadian Assistance Program and Established Programs Financing. 
The government's math provides some good news, as the original plan was to give them even less.  
 Session , 36th Parliament ,
 Session Parliament , 1st 36th
 Parliament , , 1st Session
 Session 1st , 36th ,
Volume 137, Issue 2 
 Volume 137 , Issue 2
 , Issue Volume 137 2
 Issue , Volume 137 2
 Volume 2 , Issue 137
 137 Issue Volume 2 ,
 2 Volume Issue , 137
 Volume 137 , 2 Issue
 137 Issue 2 , Volume
 Volume 2 , Issue 137
 Volume 2 Issue 137 ,
 137 Volume , 2 Issue
 2 , Volume Issue 137
 , 2 Volume Issue 137
 Issue 137 Volume 2 ,
 137 , Issue 2 Volume
 2 137 Issue , Volume
Interpretation Act 
Bill to Amend-Second Reading-Motions in Amendment-Debate Adjourned to Await Ruling of Speaker 
Motion in Sub-Amendment 
Quebec 
Linguistic School Boards-Amendment to Section 93 of Constitution-Report of Special Joint Committee Adopted 
Quebec 
Linguistic School Boards-Motion to Amend Section 93 of Constitution-Debate Adjourned 
Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration 
Sixth Report of Committee Adopted 
Bill to Amend-First Reading 
Canada Marine Bill 
First Reading 
Aboriginal Peoples 
Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples-Committee Authorized to Study Recommendations 
THE SENATE 
Tuesday, December 9, 1997 
The Senate met at 2:00 p.m., the Speaker in the Chair.  
Prayers.  
Pages Exchange Program with House of Commons 
The Hon. the Speaker :
 Volume 137 , 2
 2 Issue Volume 137
 Issue , 2 Volume
 Issue 2 137 ,
Tuesday, September 23, 1997 
 , 1997 23 Tuesday September ,
 1997 September Tuesday 23 , ,
 1997 Tuesday 23 , September ,
 September 23 Tuesday , , 1997
 1997 , September , Tuesday 23
 1997 , Tuesday , 23 September
 23 , 1997 Tuesday September ,
 September 1997 , Tuesday , 23
 , September 23 1997 Tuesday ,
 , 1997 Tuesday 23 , September
 23 September Tuesday , , 1997
 , Tuesday 1997 September 23 ,
 23 , 1997 , Tuesday September
 Tuesday 23 , September 1997 ,
 23 Tuesday , , 1997 September
 23 September 1997 , , Tuesday
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Leave is granted.  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is it your pleasure, honourable senators, to adopt the motion?  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
Motion agreed to.  
The Senate 
Conduct of Business-Notice of Inquiry 
Hon. William M. Kelly :
Honourable senators, I give notice: 
That on Thursday next, December 11, 1997, I will call the attention of the Senate to the way in which the Senate conducts its business.  
QUESTION PERIOD 
Federal-Provincial Relations 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Province of Quebec-Request for Particulars 
Hon. Fernand Roberge :
Honourable senators, my question follows the announcement made yesterday regarding the government's decision to set at $12.5 billion the cash floor for transfer payments made under the Canada health and social transfer (CHST). 
The government would have us believe that this amount represents an increase in health care payments. 
 Tuesday September 23 , 1997
 , Tuesday 1997 September ,
 September , Tuesday 23 1997
 September 23 1997 , Tuesday
The Honourable Gildas L. Molgat, Speaker 
 Honourable , Gildas L Molgat The Speaker .
 . Speaker The L Gildas , Molgat Honourable
 Speaker Honourable , The . L Gildas Molgat
 Honourable L , Gildas Speaker Molgat . The
 L , The Honourable . Molgat Speaker Gildas
 Honourable , Gildas Speaker . Molgat L The
 Speaker The L Honourable , . Gildas Molgat
 , Gildas L Molgat Honourable . Speaker The
 Gildas The Molgat Honourable Speaker , . L
 . , Speaker Molgat The Gildas Honourable L
 Speaker . , Honourable The L Gildas Molgat
 The L Molgat Honourable Speaker . , Gildas
 Honourable . , The Gildas Molgat L Speaker
 , Honourable L Molgat The . Gildas Speaker
 Gildas Speaker The L , Honourable . Molgat
 . Honourable L Molgat The , Speaker Gildas
Environment 
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Support by Provinces of Government Position taken at Kyoto-Request for Particulars 
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Target Year for Implementation of Government Position taken at Kyoto-Government Position 
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Informetrica Study on Meeting Targets-Government Position 
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Concept of Differing Targets-Government Position 
National Unity 
Recent Remarks of Prime Minister-Possible Conditions of Secession of Quebec-Government Position 
Immigration 
Tracking and Detention of Unsuccessful Refugee Claimants-Government Position 
Detention Facilities for Refugee Claimants-Request for Particulars 
Fisheries and Oceans 
Negotiations on Multilateral Agreement on Investment-Continuation of Limit on Foreign Ownership of Commercial Licences-Government Position 
National Defence 
Search and Rescue Helicopter Replacement Program-Possible Cabinet Discussion on Awarding Contract for Helicopter Purchase-Government Position 
Search and Rescue Helicopter Replacement Program-State of Sea King Helicopter Fleet-Government Position 
Federal-Provincial Relations 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Atlantic Provinces Equal to Increase in Social Transfers-Government Position 
Delayed Answers to Oral Questions 
Human Resources Development 
Changes to Canada Pension Plan-Accountability and Transparency of Investment Board-Undertaking to Publish Quarterly Financial Statements-Government Position 
 The Honourable Gildas L . Molgat Speaker
 , L Honourable Speaker The Gildas .
 Gildas , Honourable Molgat The Speaker L
 , The Speaker . Honourable Molgat L
Table of Contents 
 Contents Table of
 Table of Contents
 Contents of Table
 of Contents Table
 Contents Table of
 Table Contents of
 Contents of Table
 Contents of Table
 Contents of Table
 Contents Table of
 of Contents Table
 Table Contents of
 of Contents Table
 Table Contents of
 Table Contents of
 Contents Table of
1st Session, 36th Parliament, 
Volume 137, Issue 28 
Tuesday, December 9, 1997 
The Honourable Gildas L. Molgat, Speaker 
Table of Contents 
Pages Exchange Program with House of Commons 
SENATORS' STATEMENTS 
The Senate 
Response to Newspaper Article on Senator's Residency Qualifications 
History of the Vote in Canada 
Book Launched by Governor General 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
Report of Committee 
Income Tax Conventions Implementation Act, 1997 
Report of Committee 
Present State and Future of Agriculture 
Report of Agriculture and Forestry Committee Tabled 
Present State and Future of Forestry 
Report of Agriculture and Forestry Committee Tabled 
Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration 
 Table of
 of Contents
 Contents of
 Contents of
New Senators 
 New Senators
 New Senators
 Senators New
 Senators New
 Senators New
 New Senators
 New Senators
 New Senators
 Senators New
 Senators New
 New Senators
 Senators New
 New Senators
 Senators New
 New Senators
 Senators New
Senator Graham :
The will of Quebecers to leave must be clearly expressed. 
In addition, of course, any process that would lead to secession must respect the law.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
What does the law say on secession?  
Senator Graham :
The government has asked the Supreme Court of Canada to rule on the legality of unilateral secession.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
I had thought that Mr. Dion answered that question himself on the weekend when he said that a UDI would be illegal.  
Senator Nolin :
The Prime Minister has said he was prepared to negotiate. 
The Leader of the Government in the Senate has said the government is not prepared to negotiate.  
This morning, the Quebec minister of intergovernmental affairs, Mr. Brassard, said, and I quote: 
This is what we have always said.  
Bear in mind that this minister is a separatist. 
I repeat what he said: 
This is what we have always said.  
Mr. Chrétien has acknowledged that the federal government would negotiate. 
Could the Leader of the Government in the Senate tell us under what authority the Prime Minister could negotiate?  
Senator Graham :
 Senators
 New
 New
 New
Introduction 
 Introduction
 Introduction
 Introduction
 Introduction
 Introduction
 Introduction
 Introduction
 Introduction
 Introduction
 Introduction
 Introduction
 Introduction
 Introduction
 Introduction
 Introduction
 Introduction
How can another payroll tax be positive for the creation of jobs? 
I would like an answer to this good question.  
Another question concerns the interprovincial competition that can be expected. 
It is obvious that the provinces which used to benefit from preferential rates from the federal fund will pay the going price in future. 
They will borrow, but at a higher rate. 
The increase in debt servicing costs will inflate each province's budget.  
As far as business investment is concerned, will the populations of the provinces agree to have their savings used for businesses in other provinces at the expense of their own? 
Will the provincial governments be tempted to influence the investment board to serve their interests? 
A moment ago I said that when a government agency, a public office, is created, there is a risk of politicizing the process.  
Participation in business, with such enormous amounts, cannot be limited to a few major companies - the Canadian market is not all that big - but will also extend to a multitude of medium-sized businesses. 
The available funding will be sufficient to invest in hundreds of medium-sized businesses. 
In Quebec, for example, if I remember correctly from its last report, the Caisse de dépôt already invests in almost 800 Quebec businesses.  
Now, how are these 800 to be selected and monitored? 
There is likely to be arbitrariness and patronage.  
In addition, the Board will be everywhere and inevitably set conditions. 
Businesses will have to toe the line as the provinces do when Ottawa doles out conditional funding, as you may recall. 
This concentration of power, this centralization will be unhealthy. 
This technocracy and its perverse effects make me nervous. 
I hope one day we will have nothing worse than Mr. Sorros' manoeuvres to criticize.  
The regulations governing investments and the behaviour of administrators have not been revealed. 




Second Sitting 
 Second Sitting
 Second Sitting
 Sitting Second
 Sitting Second
 Sitting Second
 Second Sitting
 Second Sitting
 Second Sitting
 Second Sitting
 Second Sitting
 Second Sitting
 Sitting Second
 Sitting Second
 Second Sitting
 Sitting Second
 Sitting Second
After hearing the witnesses, the committee was satisfied that a majority of Catholic and Protestant parents - the two groups concerned - supported the amendment to section 93.  
One aspect of the issue that was frequently mentioned is the Quebec National Assembly's unanimous support of Bill 109 and the amendment to section 93. 
Such unanimous votes are significant, but they do not mean there is a consensus in the Catholic and Protestant communities, whose privileges are at stake. 
Such unanimity in the Quebec National Assembly proves nevertheless that support for the amendment transcends party lines. 
The PQ government was reluctant to propose that amendment, because it involved using the amending formula provided for in the Constitution Act of 1982, which that government refuses to recognize. 
The government finally yielded to the pressures from Liberal opposition members.  
Some people were concerned that the debate on national unity might detract from the substance of the amendment. 
If the only concern of the special joint committee had been to prove that "federalism works," it would not have insisted on hearing this evidence showing that there was a consensus among Catholic and Protestant parents. 
From the very beginning, the Government of Quebec assured this Parliament that there was an appropriate consensus in favour of the amendment in that province. 
However, the committee insisted on assessing and challenging these statements - so much so that the Quebec ministers responsible for education and for intergovernmental affairs eventually appeared before the committee, along with the official opposition critics on these matters. 
Clearly, what was - and still is - at issue is the legitimacy of the amendment.  
It was mentioned repeatedly that, as a result of the Supreme Court decisions, it has become obvious that the rights that are positively guaranteed under section 93 are not as broad as they were originally assumed to be. 
However, we do not believe that the amendment was justified because the denominational education rights guaranteed under section 93 were nothing more than empty shells. 
Had we been satisfied that the majority of Catholics or Protestants in Quebec were opposed to the amendment, it would not have mattered whether or not their rights carried much weight. 
I think that Senator Lavoie-Roux was quite right in saying that minorities often require special protection to be free to exercise their rights. 
But it is possible to limit or remove this special protection with the consent of a majority of this minority.  
It was then a matter of figuring out why a majority of members of these two groups were prepared to relinquish these privileges. 
It is important to point out that representatives of all the groups involved were consulted.  
Be that as it may, honourable senators, this amendment will not spell the end of denominational, be it Catholic or Protestant, education in Quebec. 
The Education Act of this province gives parents the right to choose between Catholic or Protestant denominational education for their children. 
 Second
 Sitting
 Second
 Second
Railways Bill 
 Railways Bill
 Bill Railways
 Railways Bill
 Railways Bill
 Railways Bill
 Railways Bill
 Bill Railways
 Bill Railways
 Bill Railways
 Bill Railways
 Railways Bill
 Bill Railways
 Railways Bill
 Bill Railways
 Railways Bill
 Bill Railways
On the Catholic side, we had the position of the archbishops, as limited as it was. 
We had Catholic school boards and Catholic teachers. 
I remember specifically cross-examining Catholic teachers and asking whether they had discussions with students and their parents respecting the changes. 
Their view was that they represented the broad consensus of parents and students as it applied to this amendment. 
All parents wanted a change to renovate the school system, and this was the best modality in which to do that.  
I agree with Senator Lynch-Staunton, Senator Wood and Senator Lavoie-Roux that this is not perfect. 
However, in addition to the evidence, we did refer to opinion polls that seemed to suggest a strong support for reform along these lines.  
Yes, the resolution is imperfect. 
We would like to have done it "our way," as Frank Sinatra used to say, but we must deal with the Province of Quebec in this case. 
We had to bend imperfect tools to see whether they fit our minimum requirements. 
In my view, they did not fit our minimum requirements; they fit our reasonable requirements for constitutional amendment.  
Senator Wood :
Is it not true in the letter from the bishops of Quebec - the letter the honourable senator read - that they were in favour of repealing section 93? 
They questioned linguistic rights and suggested that denominational guarantees established by 107 be maintained. 
There was a caveat there that my honourable friend forgot to read.  
Senator Grafstein :
I find myself in great difficulty defending Roman Catholic theology let alone letters from Roman Catholic archbishops. 
I will leave it to each senator to come to his or her own conclusion on the testimony and on the letters, which are appended to the report.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Honourable senators, Senator Grafstein is quite right in stating that reform is needed. 
 Bill
 Bill
 Bill
 Railways
First Reading 
 Reading First
 First Reading
 First Reading
 First Reading
 First Reading
 First Reading
 Reading First
 Reading First
 Reading First
 Reading First
 First Reading
 Reading First
 Reading First
 Reading First
 Reading First
 Reading First
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
Canada Pension Plan Investment Board Bill 
Second Reading-Debate Continued 
On the Order: 
Resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Kirby, seconded by the Honourable Senator Joyal, P.C., for the second reading of Bill C-2, to establish the Canada Pension Plan Investment Board and to amend the Canada Pension Plan and the Old Age Security Act and to make consequential amendments to other Acts.  
Hon. David Tkachuk :
However, there are a number of important issues that we believe are relevant and important not only to this side of the house but to all senators. 
Some senators, including me, are interested in this bill from a personal point of view as well. 
This bill was brought in last week so that we could work on it. 
Now, we must complete that work and pass the bill by Christmas. 
I do not think that we are handmaidens. 
We do not have to take orders. 
We must do what is right.  
This bill has important consequences for many of us, and more particularly, for our children and our grandchildren. 
Those people who are already retired and at the age of 65 will receive all their benefits. 
For those people who are in the middle and who will soon be retiring, it is not a big problem for them. 
They will have some reduced benefits and some increased costs. 
To those people who have been paying all their lives - that is, all the baby boomers who will begin to turn 50 - they will receive benefits and be faced with another 15 years of increased costs.  
I will tell you for whom this is important. 
I have a daughter who is 24 and a son who is 21. 
 First
 First
 First
 First
Speech from the Throne 
 the from Speech Throne
 the Throne Speech from
 Throne Speech from the
 Throne from Speech the
 the from Throne Speech
 Speech the Throne from
 Throne from Speech the
 Throne the Speech from
 Speech from Throne the
 Throne the Speech from
 the from Throne Speech
 from Speech Throne the
 Throne from Speech the
 from Throne Speech the
 Speech the from Throne
 Throne from Speech the
Book Launched by Governor General 
Hon. Mabel M. DeWare :
Honourable senators, yesterday, the Right Honourable Romeo LeBlanc, Governor General of Canada, launched an important new book, A History of the Vote in Canada , which recounts how the right to vote has evolved over the past 250 years. 
The book starts at the time of the first elected legislatures in what is now Canada and ends with the most recent federal election. 
It traces changes in voting eligibility, electioneering and voting practices, as well as voter turnout since Confederation. 
Extension of the vote to those who were excluded legally from the franchise, such as women, aboriginal people, religious and racial minorities, is examined in the social context of the period.  
Even though most Canadian adults were eligible to vote by 1920, there is a final chapter that looks at ways to make voting accessible to everyone, including people in all geographic locations and people with physical disabilities.  
A History of the Vote in Canada is meant to be an educational resource and a reminder to Canadians of the significance of the right to vote. 
This is in keeping with Elections Canada's 1993 mandate to educate voters about the democratic right to vote.  
While this book will appeal to historians, political scientists, university and high school teachers and students, it is hoped that it will also reach those who may have difficulty exercising their right to vote.  
As parliamentarians, honourable senators, it is our role to help promote this book and educate our fellow citizens on their rights as voters.  
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
Report of Committee 
Hon. Ron Ghitter , Chair of the Standing Senate Committee on Energy, the Environment and Natural Resources, presented the following report: 
Tuesday, December 9, 1997 
The Standing Senate Committee on Energy, the Environment and Natural Resources has the honour to present its 
SECOND REPORT 
Respectfully submitted, 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this bill be read the third time?  
 Speech from Throne
 from the Speech
 Speech the Throne
 from Throne the
Consideration Next Sitting 
 Consideration Next Sitting
 Consideration Sitting Next
 Sitting Consideration Next
 Sitting Consideration Next
 Consideration Next Sitting
 Sitting Next Consideration
 Sitting Consideration Next
 Next Consideration Sitting
 Sitting Consideration Next
 Sitting Next Consideration
 Consideration Next Sitting
 Consideration Next Sitting
 Next Consideration Sitting
 Sitting Next Consideration
 Consideration Next Sitting
 Sitting Consideration Next
Hon. Mabel M. DeWare :
Honourable senators, yesterday, the Right Honourable Romeo LeBlanc, Governor General of Canada, launched an important new book, A History of the Vote in Canada , which recounts how the right to vote has evolved over the past 250 years. 
The book starts at the time of the first elected legislatures in what is now Canada and ends with the most recent federal election. 
It traces changes in voting eligibility, electioneering and voting practices, as well as voter turnout since Confederation. 
Extension of the vote to those who were excluded legally from the franchise, such as women, aboriginal people, religious and racial minorities, is examined in the social context of the period.  
Even though most Canadian adults were eligible to vote by 1920, there is a final chapter that looks at ways to make voting accessible to everyone, including people in all geographic locations and people with physical disabilities.  
A History of the Vote in Canada is meant to be an educational resource and a reminder to Canadians of the significance of the right to vote. 
This is in keeping with Elections Canada's 1993 mandate to educate voters about the democratic right to vote.  
While this book will appeal to historians, political scientists, university and high school teachers and students, it is hoped that it will also reach those who may have difficulty exercising their right to vote.  
As parliamentarians, honourable senators, it is our role to help promote this book and educate our fellow citizens on their rights as voters.  
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
Report of Committee 
Hon. Ron Ghitter , Chair of the Standing Senate Committee on Energy, the Environment and Natural Resources, presented the following report: 
Tuesday, December 9, 1997 
The Standing Senate Committee on Energy, the Environment and Natural Resources has the honour to present its 
SECOND REPORT 
Respectfully submitted, 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this bill be read the third time?  
On motion of Senator Butts, bill placed on the Orders of the Day for third reading at the next sitting of the Senate.  
 Next Sitting
 Sitting Next
 Next Consideration
 Sitting Next
Committee of Selection 
 Selection of Committee
 Selection of Committee
 Committee of Selection
 of Selection Committee
 Selection of Committee
 Committee of Selection
 Committee Selection of
 of Committee Selection
 Committee of Selection
 Committee Selection of
 Selection Committee of
 of Selection Committee
 Selection Committee of
 of Selection Committee
 of Selection Committee
 of Committee Selection
Time allocation has been imposed seven times on other bills, most recently on third reading of Bill C-22, the Pearson airport bill. 
It was imposed on Bill C-110 which proposed certain constitutional amendments; on Bill C-12 which dealt with employment insurance; and on the committee report on Term 17. 
It is becoming a habit; a habit that is hard to break.  
Bill C-2 is just another in a series of bad bills, incompetent work and dictatorial action. 
It was introduced last week in the Senate, preceded by time allocation in the other place. 
With passage of this bill, the government will be imposing the largest tax grab in the history of the country. 
Canadians are unaware of what is happening, in particular our young people who will be the most affected and the most mistreated. 
We owe it to them, our grandchildren and our children, to study this legislation thoroughly and to amend it, because it is not their fault that this program has been so badly managed. 
They will have little chance of collecting under the CPP, hence the changes the government intends to make.  
We are simply shovelling our hard-earned money into the greedy hands of Paul Martin, Minister of Finance, who wants to be the man who slays the deficit dragon, and we know how he intends to do it. 
He has followed three policy themes to accomplish that end.  
First, he has transferred much of the tax burden to the provinces, forcing what I call "downloaded increased taxes." 
Provincial and municipal governments, who were receiving less money, had to increase taxes. 
The government transferred debt.  
Second, this government has taken advantage of the low interest rates which resulted from the efforts of the Conservative government over eight years to bring the deficit and inflation under control and to bring interest rates down.  
Third, Paul Martin then not only raised licence fees and taxes, he used the accumulated surplus in the EI fund to pay down the deficit. 
It is this third policy theme with which we, on this side, feel most uncomfortable. 
He used the surplus in the EI fund, not to extend benefits, not to reduce premiums - which is normally what is done in a payroll deduction - but to cut benefits for a totally separate policy objective. 
He used this payroll tax purely and simply, to achieve his policy goal of cutting the deficit.  
That is why the Auditor General is prohibited from examining the fund unless the directors of the fund agree. 
 Committee of
 of Selection
 Committee of
 of Committee
Appointment 
 Appointment
 Appointment
 Appointment
 Appointment
 Appointment
 Appointment
 Appointment
 Appointment
 Appointment
 Appointment
 Appointment
 Appointment
 Appointment
 Appointment
 Appointment
 Appointment
Recent Remarks of Prime Minister-Possible Conditions of Secession of Quebec-Government Position 
Hon. Pierre Claude Nolin :
Honourable senators, I would like to return to the matter of the Prime Minister's statement last weekend on Quebec's secession. 
He said in fact last week in Quebec City that he would be prepared to negotiate Quebec's separation, if certain conditions were met.  
I would first like to know what conditions the Prime Minister was referring to?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, the Government of Canada has always said that Quebecers would not be kept within Canada against their will. 
That being said, breaking up a country is not a step that one would take lightly. 
Senator Graham :
The will of Quebecers to leave must be clearly expressed. 
In addition, of course, any process that would lead to secession must respect the law.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
What does the law say on secession?  
Senator Graham :
The government has asked the Supreme Court of Canada to rule on the legality of unilateral secession.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
I had thought that Mr. Dion answered that question himself on the weekend when he said that a UDI would be illegal.  
Senator Nolin :
The Prime Minister has said he was prepared to negotiate. 
The Leader of the Government in the Senate has said the government is not prepared to negotiate.  




Business of the Senate 
 the Senate of Business
 Senate of the Business
 the Senate of Business
 Business of the Senate
 of the Senate Business
 the Senate of Business
 Business Senate the of
 Senate the of Business
 Senate of the Business
 of Business Senate the
 Senate of the Business
 the Senate of Business
 of Business the Senate
 of the Business Senate
 the Business Senate of
 of Business Senate the
People were, shall I say, "fuddling". 
It was not their fault; it was the fault of scientists. 
The cause, they say, was social behaviour. 
That is what caused the end of this pension plan. 
It is one other social plan gone astray. 
The good old days are gone.  
We have another problem. 
People live longer. 
Again, science has interfered with a social plan. 
Retiring at age 65, dropping dead three to six years later, depending on your gender, was good for governments. 
At its inception in 1965 - payments started on January 1, 1967 - in order to be eligible for CPP benefits, you had to be 68, and 68 was about the same year that the average male died. 
It was the perfect pension plan:
Pay all your lives, and then die just as the first cheque is put into the mail. 
If there was a postal strike, the government had the benefit of both worlds - the pensioner was dead and the cheque was in the mail.  
From the beginning, the CPP was simple, but it was misnamed. 
It was misnamed because it is also a life insurance program. 
However, it is a silly program when it is part of a pension plan.  
Instead of cancelling the benefit, there is an argument made as to whether it should be means tested when cancelled or not. 
That is an area where we can save a lot of money because, as people are dying today, cheques are going out in the mail, at $3,500 a shot. 
Yet we do not have enough money to pay proper pensions when people are alive.  
 Business of Senate
 the Senate Business
 the Business Senate
 Business Senate the
Adjournment 
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
You cannot have high EI premiums or high taxation through high EI premiums to pay your deficit down; then jack up your rates on the Canada Pension Plan; and then modify the OAS and GIS such that people receive reduced payouts, because you are hitting the same generation. 
You have bought off the seniors, and you are hitting the kids. 
They will not forget that.  
On October 30, Senator Tkachuk asked the following: 
Why is the government trying to fix the CPP by hitting hardest those least able to afford it?...  
Could the Leader of the Government in the Senate prevail upon his colleague the Minister of Finance to have his officials produce information showing the impact of the freeze in the earnings exemption for different ranges of income?  
For example, could data be prepared showing how much the freeze will benefit the government from those earning income below the poverty line relative to their family income, and how much it will save those with incomes above the poverty line relative to their total income?  
In other words, it is and will be perceived as another tax.  
On November 5, Senator Oliver said: 
They are increasing it by one month per year to give people time to adjust to the new reality of that retirement age. 
In effect, that will keep things in relative control.  
It should have been explained to Canadians that the government explored that method and rejected it for specific reasons. 
As others have said before me, people are living longer. 
While the age of 65 was formerly not achieved by many, it is being achieved by most today. 
That should be taken into consideration as a basis for increasing the age for retirement because it will decrease the burden on the young people who today believe that they will have to pay the whole shot for us.  
Senator Oliver continued: 
Honourable senators, in these times of slowing real incomes, increasing long-term interest rates, high personal taxes, increased CPP premiums, and ridiculously high EI premiums, where does the Leader of the Government believe that Canadians, who will receive less money from public plans, will find money to put away in their RRSPs to secure their own retirements?  
On November 6, Senator Oliver asked: 
Honourable senators, in 1995, the Department of Finance conducted a study on the impact of the increase in CPP premiums between 1986 and 1995. 
During that period, employee contributions rose from 1.85 per cent to 2.25 per cent of earnings, and the combined rate rose from 3.6 to 5 per cent.  




Debates of the Senate (Hansard) 
 Senate of Hansard ( Debates ) the
 Hansard Senate the of Debates ) (
 Senate of Debates Hansard ) ( the
 Hansard Senate of ) Debates the (
 the Hansard Debates of ) ( Senate
 the Hansard ) ( of Debates Senate
 the Hansard of ) ( Senate Debates
 ( of Debates Senate the ) Hansard
 of ( the Hansard Debates ) Senate
 Hansard ( Senate the ) Debates of
 Hansard Senate ) of the ( Debates
 of Hansard the ( Senate ) Debates
 Senate ) the Debates Hansard of (
 ( Hansard ) Debates of Senate the
 the ) Debates Hansard of ( Senate
 ) of Debates ( Hansard the Senate
Applying the Access to Information Act to the CPP Investment Board would be inappropriate.  
The Board's mandate is to invest CPP funds at arm's length from governments in the best interest of plan members. 
As an investment institution, much of its day-to-day activities will be commercially sensitive and would be exempt under ATI in any event.  
While ATI does not apply to the CPP Investment Board, by legislation and regulations the Board's operations will be very transparent and it will be subject to close public scrutiny.  
For example, the Board will be required to: 
- make public its investment policies, code of conduct, corporate governance practices, proxy voting guidelines, and by-laws 
- disclose the compensation of the five most highly compensated officers of the Board 
- prepare quarterly financial statements that will be sent to federal and provincial Finance Ministers, and an annual report that will be tabled in Parliament 
- hold regular public meetings in each participating province to allow for public discussion and input 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
Commemoration of Fiftieth Anniversary-Plans of Government 
(Response to question raised by Hon. Noël A. Kinsella on October 23, 1997) 
The 50th Anniversary provides Canadians an opportunity to reflect on the importance of human rights in the life of the country, as they are a fundamental unifying value and an important part of our legacy to future generations.  
The objectives of the commemoration are to promote respect for human rights and responsibilities; mark Canada's national and international progress in implementing human rights standards; develop innovative and responsive approaches to emerging human rights issues; and, to link values highly esteemed by Canadians - values such as respect for the rule of law, dignity of the person, fairness, equitable treatment and democratic participation - to a broader government agenda related to social cohesion and social justice.  
Activities planned around December 10, 1997 for the launch of the 50th Anniversary commemorative year of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) 
National Defence 
Lack of Helicopter for Number of Navy Frigates-Government Position 
(Response to question raised by Hon. J. Michael Forrestall on November 20, 1997) 
An eleventh detachment is required for Canada's full time commitment of one ship to NATO's Standing Naval Force Atlantic.  
Maritime Command employs a three-tiered approach to fleet readiness: ships fulfilling national commitments are at High Readiness; ships in refit or major maintenance periods are at Extended Readiness; and, the remainder of the fleet is at Normal Readiness. 
 Debates of the Senate ( Hansard
 Debates of ) Hansard ( Senate
 the ( ) Senate of Debates
 of Debates ( Hansard ) Senate
Tuesday, September 23, 1997 
 1997 , 23 , September Tuesday
 , 23 1997 , Tuesday September
 , , 23 September 1997 Tuesday
 , 23 1997 Tuesday September ,
 September 23 1997 Tuesday , ,
 , Tuesday 1997 23 , September
 , 23 September , 1997 Tuesday
 1997 , September , Tuesday 23
 Tuesday 1997 September , , 23
 September , 1997 , Tuesday 23
 , 23 September Tuesday , 1997
 Tuesday 1997 , 23 , September
 1997 , , September 23 Tuesday
 , September Tuesday , 1997 23
 September , 1997 Tuesday , 23
 September 1997 Tuesday , , 23
If I felt secure in the prognosis that the Senate would rise at three o'clock - which is the assumption on which we base our start time of 1:30 p.m. - I certainly would not undertake to put forward this motion. 
However, past experience suggests that, notwithstanding the fact that we do meet on Wednesdays at 1:30 p.m., we often sit well beyond three o'clock. 
On one occasion we had witnesses waiting for upwards of an hour.  
Senator Kinsella :
Thank you, Senator Stewart.  
Perhaps I might address the Deputy Leader of the Government, then. 
By way of recapitulation, this issue is important for all honourable senators. 
A request for leave has been made by the Chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee to allow that committee to sit tomorrow, Wednesday, even though the Senate may then be sitting. 
The issue is that Wednesday, in our common understanding, was to be a short day to allow committees to sit on Wednesday afternoons.  
Not just today but at other times, Senator Stewart has brought to our attention the fact that committees operate on that assumption and arrange their business plans, only to be frustrated in executing their business plan by the Senate going way beyond 3:00 or 3:30 p.m. on Wednesday afternoons.  
Senator Stewart has explained to us that that is the main concern. 
He would like some assurance from the leadership on both sides that, on Wednesdays, we would try harder to respect that tradition. 
We on this side agree to make every effort to complete our work on Wednesday afternoons at around 3:00 or 3:15 p.m. If you can also agree, perhaps we do not need to have this motion.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, is leave granted?  
Senator Kinsella :
It depends upon the answer.  
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, we must make an effort to allow committees to sit. 
They do invite witnesses, many of whom come from out of town. 
 Tuesday , September 23 1997
 Tuesday September 23 1997 ,
 , 23 Tuesday , 1997
 23 , September , 1997
The Senate met at 11:00 a.m., the Speaker in the Chair.  
 a met 11 Speaker in . m . Chair at ., The : 00 Senate the the
 the . a met Chair Senate : m the in Speaker at 00 ., . The 11
 a : Senate in 11 00 the . ., at m met . the The Chair Speaker
 Chair met . 11 the 00 at Senate Speaker in the a : The m ., .
 at . the m : a the ., Speaker Senate 11 . 00 met Chair The in
 . Speaker the in ., met the Chair : 11 00 . The m a Senate at
 at m : . Chair The Speaker the 11 the 00 in met . ., Senate a
 Senate at a the 00 Chair the 11 The in . m . Speaker : met .,
 at a The . ., the m 11 Senate met 00 : in the . Speaker Chair
 00 . at . 11 : The met m the ., Speaker in a Chair the Senate
 met 11 The : . Speaker . Senate ., in 00 a the at the m Chair
 The Senate met 11 Speaker 00 . the the ., at : . a Chair in m
 The m at the : Chair 11 the 00 in Senate met a . . Speaker .,
 . The 00 the Speaker : the ., a m in . Chair Senate 11 met at
 met The Senate . the in ., 00 at . Chair 11 : a m Speaker the
 : 00 . in the a 11 ., . m the at Senate The met Chair Speaker
Although we noted there was a consensus to amend section 93, we felt the real issue was the quality of the education of children in Quebec, and on that point opinion was unanimous.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Senator Robichaud, allow me to correct an impression that you left and to ask you a question. 
However, I wanted to make this correction, because you referred to the "government in place", when in fact it was the Liberal government of the day that made the decision, over the objections of the Parti Québécois then in opposition.  
I am asking you the same question I asked Senator Grafstein, but to which I did not get an answer. 
Why is it so important to exempt Quebec from section 93 to allow it to reform its school system? 
What is the connection between the two?  
Senator Robichaud :
Let me give you my version of the facts. 
When we heard witnesses from Quebec, including school board officials, parents and teachers, some of them told us that, in its present form, section 93 brings about a superimposition of structures, particularly in the Montreal region. 
These people told us that this was preventing authorities from providing the best possible services. 
These people also told us they wanted the resolution to be passed before the end of the year so they could start long-term planning. 
They would really appreciate having some time to implement these changes.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
I do not want to unduly prolong the debate, but I have another question for Senator Robichaud. 
Since we did not get answers to certain questions, would you agree to invite the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs, who is the sponsor of this resolution, to appear before the Senate in committee of the whole? 
We would like him to give us certain assurances before we make a decision on this issue?  
Senator Robichaud :
Honourable senators, the minister who is the sponsor of the resolution has already appeared before the joint committee. 
He came at the beginning and at the end of the hearings, and my honourable colleague was there to ask him questions on the issues that were of concern to him.  
 The Senate met at 11 : 00 a m ., the Speaker in the Chair .
 00 Chair at met m ., Senate The . the 11 : a in Speaker .
 Speaker the in a ., at the Senate The m Chair : . 11 00 .
 met 11 the the a m in ., The . Speaker 00 Chair at . Senate
Prayers.  
 . Prayers
 . Prayers
 Prayers .
 . Prayers
 . Prayers
 Prayers .
 . Prayers
 . Prayers
 . Prayers
 . Prayers
 Prayers .
 . Prayers
 Prayers .
 . Prayers
 Prayers .
 Prayers .
With respect to individual provinces, I do not have those numbers. 
However, I would be happy to provide them for my honourable friend.  
Senator Roberge :
Could the minister find out at the same time why, in the same time period, Ontario's share of the cash transfers will increase to $173 million?  
Senator Graham :
Yes. 
While I am doing that, I should like to remind the honourable senator that even before the federal government balances the books, it is putting more money into transfers to the provinces. 
In fact, the government is raising the cash floor from $11 billion to $12.5 billion, the single largest reinvestment made by the federal government. 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Provinces-Effect on Atlantic Provinces 
Hon. Mabel M. DeWare :
Honourable senators, my figures show that, four years ago, the provinces received more than $19 billion in cash transfers for health, education and welfare through what was then known as the Canadian Assistance Program and Established Programs Financing. 
The government's math provides some good news, as the original plan was to give them even less.  
The problem is that some provinces will get less under the new scheme while others will get more. 
Indeed, seven of the ten provinces will actually see their cash transfers fall even further, including all of Atlantic Canada.  
The cash transfer to Nova Scotia will fall from $427 million to $411 million, which is a difference of $16 million. 
The transfer for Prince Edward Island will fall from $60 million to $59 million, which is a reduction of $1 million. 
The cash transfer to Newfoundland will fall from $281 million to $251 million, which is a difference of $30 million. 
New Brunswick will lose $11 million. 
The total loss to the Atlantic provinces is $58 million.  
At the same time, three provinces, Ontario, Alberta and British Columbia will see their cash payments actually rise. 
 .
 .
 .
 Prayers
New Senators 
 New Senators
 New Senators
 Senators New
 Senators New
 Senators New
 New Senators
 Senators New
 New Senators
 New Senators
 New Senators
 Senators New
 New Senators
 Senators New
 Senators New
 Senators New
 Senators New
Ontario's Conservative government is also demanding large cuts to UI premiums, Mr. Eves said in an interview...  
Alberta Treasurer Stockwell Day also indicated last week that he'll be pushing Mr. Martin for tax cuts.  
I predict today that, although this government has managed to get away with things for which our government would have been slaughtered, I think this bill, coupled with what is coming down the track and the changes in OAS and GIS, coupled with the arrogance of the stance taken at Kyoto, this is the kind of arrogance that, inevitably, will be the downfall of this government. 
I predict that that is about to happen.  
Hon. Thelma J. Chalifoux :
Honourable senators, I have a number of concerns regarding the statements of Senator Stratton. 
I would like to know what his position is on the working poor and on part-time workers. 
In this country, there are more part-time workers and more working poor than there are people who identify as middle class. 
What is the honourable senator's opinion on that?  
In this country, we have a totally isolated segment of society which is called "the mid-Canada corridor." 
Even in terms of communications, there is very little. 
What would the honourable senator do in the area of communication for those in isolated settlements regarding private pension plans? 
There are no words in Cree or michif for "private pension plan."  
I was a member of the working poor in 1965 and 1966 when this plan was put into force. 
I did not agree with the Canada Pension Plan. 
However, I will guarantee honourable senators right now that I totally agree with deductions being made, because now at least I have a pension.  
What will happen if this plan goes through is that the people in this country who really need it will get it. 
They have to travel 240 kilometres to the closest bank. 
Many do not speak English. 
What would you do in this case for these people who have nothing?  
 Senators
 New
 Senators
 New
The Hon. the Speaker :
 Speaker the Hon . The :
 The the : Hon Speaker .
 . the Hon Speaker The :
 : the . The Speaker Hon
 Speaker Hon The : . the
 the Hon The . Speaker :
 The . : the Speaker Hon
 Speaker the : The Hon .
 . the Speaker : Hon The
 Hon Speaker : The the .
 the The : . Hon Speaker
 The Hon Speaker the . :
 Hon . The : Speaker the
 Speaker : . The the Hon
 the : The Speaker Hon .
 . Speaker Hon : The the
And the tedium?  
That is what we need to tell them at Christmas when we go home; not that we passed the bill.  
Hon. Roch Bolduc :
Honourable senators, I will not go back over the very important points raised by my colleague with respect to the intergenerational inequity in this bill. 
I would like to look at other aspects of the problem.  
Honourable senators, the government is proposing to amend the CPP. 
I would have found it appropriate to examine all the major aspects of the plan at this time. 
This has been done for some important facets such as its survival, its management and its performance. 
I will address these shortly.  
This strikes me as an important question. 
Why, for instance, if I do not wish to contribute and prefer to look after my own financial security, should I be obliged by law to participate in the plan, even if I am prepared to sign a document absolving the government of all responsibility on my account? 
Why must everyone belong to a plan whose money will be invested by others, by public servants?  
The government's response to this fundamental question is obligatory collectivization. 
The government seems to assume that Canadians are irresponsible, ignorant, and improvident, and that big brother in Ottawa knows best.  
If he is so competent, what has this big brother been doing for 20 years? 
He agreed to give pension benefits to people, but forgot to levy what he needed to be able to do so, and what he levied, he loaned to the provinces at such low rates that, unless there are drastic changes, the plan will go bankrupt.  
Here we have a classic case of public mismanagement. 
On the one hand, they hand out goodies and, on the other, they forget to charge for them. 
And now they have learned nothing from this sad tale:
Ottawa is asking for even more from everyone and tells us that this time it will invest the money wisely and that it will be for the future good of all.  
 The Hon the Speaker :
 The . Speaker : the
 The the . Hon :
 Hon The the : Speaker
Honourable senators, I have the honour to inform the Senate that the Clerk has received certificates from the Registrar General of Canada showing that the following persons, respectively, have been summoned to the Senate: 
 the , I been have certificates following respectively showing from that , received honour inform Registrar the : Senate Senate , the have General the senators persons of the Clerk to to has Canada summoned Honourable the that
 Canada Clerk Senate to the received has to I Registrar have General have : showing Honourable summoned , of senators that the been Senate following the honour inform the , that from certificates the , respectively the persons
 received , persons been from that : inform Senate Registrar certificates have to Canada the has have showing the I General the to the summoned senators the Senate , Honourable of the honour that following Clerk , respectively
 received persons the Senate following respectively Honourable to Registrar the : showing , Canada inform have have been the General to honour summoned senators Clerk the from , has , that that of certificates Senate the the I
 following Registrar honour has Honourable summoned showing that Senate General of , respectively the received the that the senators certificates the have have : Canada the inform , to persons to , Clerk been Senate the from I
 the of respectively the showing following senators persons Clerk the the certificates honour Canada to have to I the has : , been Senate Honourable General from Senate , that Registrar the summoned received that inform have ,
 to the of Clerk the the , the have summoned to I Honourable senators Senate Canada has , the that have that been inform received , Senate persons Registrar following respectively the showing General honour from : certificates
 Senate : honour persons the the the has that senators of the showing I the respectively Senate the General Honourable have summoned to from inform received following been , Registrar , to , Clerk certificates that have Canada
 the : the Honourable to , certificates received the the inform Canada that have from Clerk honour persons showing Senate that Registrar the been summoned has have Senate to the of General senators , following respectively , I
 the General : Canada persons that Clerk the inform the Senate to senators summoned to I from the showing , have Honourable been of has that the , following certificates Registrar honour received Senate the have , respectively
 Senate to that have received I the the that , Clerk summoned inform to : honour the the have General from Canada the the showing respectively , persons senators been Senate following certificates Honourable has Registrar , of
 to the the summoned honour showing persons received been : that , of Senate the Registrar I Clerk respectively have has inform to Senate the from that have the , certificates Canada , the senators General Honourable following
 the received the certificates Clerk the the Canada , that have Honourable from summoned have Senate of , Registrar inform Senate to , : has that honour General been senators respectively I showing the persons the following to
 the the Senate following : Clerk Senate I to of , the General to been the summoned the have have showing inform Registrar honour respectively that senators that Honourable Canada certificates , from the persons received , has
 Clerk from to General senators has Registrar : have Honourable , inform have respectively the the I that been of , the Senate certificates that the persons honour received showing Senate , the Canada following the summoned to
 been Canada from of honour , Registrar the that : the the respectively Clerk General received that Senate Senate senators have following Honourable summoned , , I to showing the inform have the has to the persons certificates
It is my understanding that those helicopters are at sea on exercises. 
As to precisely where they are, on whatever ocean, I cannot positively say. 
It might be a military secret, as a matter of fact.  
Federal-Provincial Relations 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Atlantic Provinces Equal to Increase in Social Transfers-Government Position 
Hon. Brenda M. Robertson :
Honourable senators, I have a supplementary that goes back to questions raised by the Honourable Senator DeWare. 
I will come back to this again tomorrow and the next day.  
I should like to know from the Leader of the Government in the Senate whether the cuts we discussed yesterday in the social transfer payments for Atlantic Canada represent the increases in the social transfers that were announced twice previously by this government? 
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
No, not that I am aware, but it is an interesting question. 
I will bring forth an answer.  
Delayed Answers to Oral Questions 
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, I have a response to a question raised in the Senate on November 25, 1997, by the Honourable Senator Oliver regarding changes to the Canada Pension Plan and the Investment Board; a response to a question raised in the Senate on November 19, 1997, by the Honourable Senator Oliver regarding the Investment Board not being subject to Access to Information; a response to a question raised in the Senate on October 23, 1997, by the Honourable Senator Kinsella regarding commemoration of the 50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights; a response to a question raised in the Senate on November 20, 1997, by the Honourable Senator Forrestall regarding the lack of helicopters for a number of navy frigates; and a response to a question raised in the Senate on November 20, 1997, by the Honourable Senator Spivak regarding the demolition of government laboratories and the possibility of a restoration of funding.  
Human Resources Development 
Changes to Canada Pension Plan-Accountability and Transparency of Investment Board-Undertaking to Publish Quarterly Financial Statements-Government Position 
(Response to question raised by Hon. Donald H. Oliver on November 25, 1997) 
Bill C-2 requires that the Board prepare unaudited quarterly statements and provide them to the federal and provincial Ministers of Finance. 
The Board may choose to make those statements directly available to the public but the legislation does not require this.  
 Honourable senators , I have the honour to inform the Senate that the Clerk has received certificates from the Registrar General of Canada showing that the following persons , respectively , have been summoned to the :
 persons , Honourable Senate been : senators certificates that following of Clerk has received have to , the inform General Canada Senate I have honour that Registrar the to the the showing respectively from summoned the the
 have been from to showing I honour to , the has , have General respectively the senators : that Senate Registrar inform Canada that persons of the Senate summoned following the Clerk certificates received , the Honourable
 I inform to showing following : , have Clerk from the has persons , to General the Honourable the the received certificates Senate the have respectively summoned that , the Registrar that been senators honour Senate Canada
Hon. Fernand Robichaud, P.C. 
 . . , P Fernand . Hon Robichaud C
 . Fernand P . Hon . Robichaud C ,
 . , Robichaud . Fernand Hon C . P
 , . . P Fernand Hon Robichaud . C
 . C . Hon , P Robichaud Fernand .
 C Fernand Robichaud P Hon . . . ,
 C . , Hon . P . Robichaud Fernand
 C . Robichaud . P Hon , Fernand .
 . C Hon , Fernand Robichaud . P .
 Hon Robichaud . C P . . , Fernand
 P , Fernand C Hon Robichaud . . .
 . Fernand C Hon Robichaud . , . P
 C . Fernand . , P Hon Robichaud .
 Fernand , C . . Hon P Robichaud .
 . . P Robichaud Fernand , . Hon C
 . . P Fernand , Robichaud C Hon .
The answer, honourable senators, is that they have been consulting with the fishing industry. 
I believe the position of the industry is exactly as suggested by my honourable friend. 
That is something else that I will have clarified for him.  
National Defence 
Search and Rescue Helicopter Replacement Program-Possible Cabinet Discussion on Awarding Contract for Helicopter Purchase-Government Position 
Hon. J. Michael Forrestall :
Honourable senators, did the cabinet consider the awarding of a contract for new search and rescue helicopters this morning? 
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, my honourable friend would be the first to recognize that it is not appropriate for me to comment on any discussions that took place in cabinet this morning. 
Hon. Lowell Murray :
Would it be appropriate for the honourable minister to let us know whether it was considered last week?  
Senator Graham :
The matter of the helicopters is under active consideration by the government.  
Cabinet met last Thursday. 
Senator Forrestall :
If that is the last cabinet meeting before the Christmas break, I gather we will not see any decision until sometime in the new year.  
Senator Graham :
If that is a question, I would hope my honourable friend is wrong, and that I am correct in saying that it is to be hoped that there will be a decision before the end of this year.  
Senator Forrestall :
Cabinet will meet again, then. 
 Hon . Fernand Robichaud , P . C
 . Robichaud . C Fernand Hon , P
 Robichaud Fernand . Hon , . . P
 . Hon Robichaud . P . , Fernand
Sister Mary Alice (Peggy) Butts 
 Peggy Mary Sister ( Butts ) Alice
 Alice ) ( Butts Sister Peggy Mary
 Butts ( Alice Mary Sister Peggy )
 Peggy Alice Mary ( Butts ) Sister
 ( Peggy Mary ) Sister Butts Alice
 Mary Alice ( Peggy ) Sister Butts
 ( Mary Alice Butts ) Peggy Sister
 Peggy Butts ( Alice ) Mary Sister
 ) Sister Alice Butts Mary ( Peggy
 Peggy ) ( Butts Sister Mary Alice
 ( Sister Peggy Mary ) Butts Alice
 Alice Butts ( Peggy Mary Sister )
 ) Peggy Mary Butts Sister Alice (
 Mary Sister Butts Peggy Alice ( )
 ( Peggy Butts Mary Sister Alice )
 ( Peggy Alice ) Sister Butts Mary
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
Senator Bolduc :
Honourable senators, clearly, we will be increasing the cost of jobs for businesses, and the cost of work for individuals. 
How can another payroll tax be positive for the creation of jobs? 
I would like an answer to this good question.  
Another question concerns the interprovincial competition that can be expected. 
It is obvious that the provinces which used to benefit from preferential rates from the federal fund will pay the going price in future. 
They will borrow, but at a higher rate. 
The increase in debt servicing costs will inflate each province's budget.  
As far as business investment is concerned, will the populations of the provinces agree to have their savings used for businesses in other provinces at the expense of their own? 
Will the provincial governments be tempted to influence the investment board to serve their interests? 
A moment ago I said that when a government agency, a public office, is created, there is a risk of politicizing the process.  
Participation in business, with such enormous amounts, cannot be limited to a few major companies - the Canadian market is not all that big - but will also extend to a multitude of medium-sized businesses. 
The available funding will be sufficient to invest in hundreds of medium-sized businesses. 
In Quebec, for example, if I remember correctly from its last report, the Caisse de dépôt already invests in almost 800 Quebec businesses.  
Now, how are these 800 to be selected and monitored? 
There is likely to be arbitrariness and patronage.  
In addition, the Board will be everywhere and inevitably set conditions. 
Businesses will have to toe the line as the provinces do when Ottawa doles out conditional funding, as you may recall. 
 Sister Alice ( Peggy ) Butts
 ) Peggy Alice Butts Sister (
 Mary Alice ) Butts ( Sister
 ) Peggy Sister Alice ( Butts
Introduction 
 Introduction
 Introduction
 Introduction
 Introduction
 Introduction
 Introduction
 Introduction
 Introduction
 Introduction
 Introduction
 Introduction
 Introduction
 Introduction
 Introduction
 Introduction
 Introduction
- he has bone cancer and must live in the British Columbia city for treatments".  
Senator Lucier replies: 
I wonder if Jack Aubry is questioning the fact that I have cancer. 
I would gladly give him permission to question my doctor as to whether I have had cancer for 10 years.  
4. I would like to have these points clarified but not in the media. 
I truly appreciate all the support I have received from my colleagues regarding this subject. 
Thanks to all of you.  
History of the Vote in Canada 
Book Launched by Governor General 
Hon. Mabel M. DeWare :
Honourable senators, yesterday, the Right Honourable Romeo LeBlanc, Governor General of Canada, launched an important new book, A History of the Vote in Canada , which recounts how the right to vote has evolved over the past 250 years. 
The book starts at the time of the first elected legislatures in what is now Canada and ends with the most recent federal election. 
It traces changes in voting eligibility, electioneering and voting practices, as well as voter turnout since Confederation. 
Extension of the vote to those who were excluded legally from the franchise, such as women, aboriginal people, religious and racial minorities, is examined in the social context of the period.  
Even though most Canadian adults were eligible to vote by 1920, there is a final chapter that looks at ways to make voting accessible to everyone, including people in all geographic locations and people with physical disabilities.  
A History of the Vote in Canada is meant to be an educational resource and a reminder to Canadians of the significance of the right to vote. 
This is in keeping with Elections Canada's 1993 mandate to educate voters about the democratic right to vote.  
While this book will appeal to historians, political scientists, university and high school teachers and students, it is hoped that it will also reach those who may have difficulty exercising their right to vote.  
As parliamentarians, honourable senators, it is our role to help promote this book and educate our fellow citizens on their rights as voters.  
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 




The Hon. the Speaker having informed the Senate that there were senators without, waiting to be introduced: 
 without The , waiting having be that Speaker were to senators introduced . : the informed Hon there the Senate
 senators there . Senate having without The Hon were be informed : the waiting that , to introduced the Speaker
 the Senate that : informed The waiting Hon the Speaker , without be having there introduced were . to senators
 waiting that there : Hon the were , informed introduced having The Speaker without senators . Senate to be the
 having the that be : introduced Senate . senators Hon informed waiting The without Speaker , there to were the
 were the to that informed there Hon having : . Senate introduced Speaker without , waiting be The senators the
 Hon without , having informed : there the introduced The waiting Senate Speaker were the senators to that . be
 informed senators there , having waiting . introduced Senate to Hon be without the the The : that were Speaker
 : introduced , waiting Senate Speaker Hon to senators the having there without be that The . the were informed
 . , be senators that Hon : to were the The there without informed having Senate introduced waiting Speaker the
 introduced The be senators to informed , . there Speaker having were : Senate without waiting that the Hon the
 introduced . the , The without informed were Speaker the Senate to senators Hon waiting be having there : that
 Hon The were having the to . the be , without that there introduced Senate : Speaker senators informed waiting
 The Hon informed introduced senators . there the that be : to Senate Speaker without were , waiting having the
 Hon the waiting the having senators to Speaker . , that introduced there be The were : without informed Senate
 , Hon that Senate the there be senators the waiting were : informed . without introduced The to having Speaker
They questioned linguistic rights and suggested that denominational guarantees established by 107 be maintained. 
There was a caveat there that my honourable friend forgot to read.  
Senator Grafstein :
I find myself in great difficulty defending Roman Catholic theology let alone letters from Roman Catholic archbishops. 
I will leave it to each senator to come to his or her own conclusion on the testimony and on the letters, which are appended to the report.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Honourable senators, Senator Grafstein is quite right in stating that reform is needed. 
Actually, reform is well under way in Quebec. 
The new system, it seems, will be in place for the next school year. 
New linguistic boards will be set up. 
There will be some difficulties, but, overall, it is proceeding quite well.  
What linkage is there between the new school system in Quebec and the request to exempt Quebec from certain obligations of section 93? 
I do not see any.  
Senator Grafstein :
Honourable senators, there is constitutional law. 
Quebec wants to proceed by the rule of law. 
They are seeking to renovate their system under the rule of law and the Constitution.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
That is not my question.  
Senator Grafstein :
 The Hon . the Speaker having informed Senate that there were senators without , waiting to be introduced :
 to were without senators that . Hon the informed there , Senate introduced the waiting Speaker The having :
 there waiting Senate the Hon without introduced senators Speaker that . to The be the were : having ,
 introduced . that informed Speaker the Senate : senators Hon to without having the be were The waiting there
Hon. Fernand Robichaud , P.C., of Saint-Louis-de-Kent, New Brunswick, introduced between Hon. B. Alasdair Graham, P.C., and Hon. Louis-J. Robichaud, P.C. 
 New . Saint C B Robichaud , , - , Graham - Louis . . of de Hon P - J Louis , ., . . introduced - . between . Robichaud P ., . Brunswick Hon P Hon C Kent . C Fernand Alasdair and ,
 ., , P P , - Saint , Robichaud between , de Robichaud . Hon C Alasdair Hon Graham . of C . Brunswick - and Louis - . B Louis , J . New . Hon Kent C . introduced . . ., Fernand P -
 Louis Alasdair Hon , Hon , P Graham . . - ., of New Robichaud , Fernand , . Hon de ., Louis Saint P B between P . C . C - - J - . introduced Kent and C , . . Robichaud . Brunswick
 Hon . ., P . - de introduced Hon C , Kent , . , Robichaud Graham . - Hon . J ., . . P New between C Louis - C Fernand , Robichaud and . B P Saint . Brunswick of Louis , Alasdair -
 between - P - , . Saint J P Hon . . C B ., , New Graham and Robichaud C ., P . . , , Fernand . . of , Hon - de . Robichaud C . Kent Alasdair Hon Louis - introduced Brunswick Louis
 P Brunswick de ., J Graham - . P , Robichaud Kent Louis of . - Hon . C Robichaud Saint Louis Alasdair B introduced , C , , . New - ., Hon . C Fernand Hon P . - . . between . , and
 ., - , de Saint P - . B Hon C Louis Hon . and Fernand New Graham Hon ., . Brunswick . P Alasdair , , Robichaud J . P of , . . . C introduced C Kent between Louis . - - , Robichaud
 Hon , - ., P C Robichaud - . - New Alasdair Kent . Louis , . Robichaud . - P de , Fernand Graham Brunswick introduced Louis Saint , . Hon C C . and . J of P B . Hon ., between , .
 Louis ., , Hon - - C de New Alasdair . of , C Graham Saint . Louis - , ., . , . B Hon J . . between introduced and C . Fernand Robichaud P . P Hon Kent Robichaud - . P Brunswick ,
 - - de Hon B introduced . Robichaud Hon . . . of P - . New . , Fernand Robichaud . Graham C . Kent - Brunswick , P , C J , . Alasdair P and between , Louis Louis Saint Hon C ., .,
 C , P Robichaud ., de P Kent and P . , of Robichaud between , . J Alasdair Hon - Louis Fernand . Brunswick - . , introduced Hon Saint C , ., New Louis Hon . - - Graham . C . . B .
 - . Hon Kent of , , , Alasdair . P and . Hon Robichaud C Hon Graham New ., J Saint de between P introduced - Brunswick Louis Fernand B Robichaud - . C - . . . Louis . P ., C , . ,
 Hon J . ., Louis . between , B Hon . , and P , Hon Kent C P . . Robichaud Brunswick . C New . - , Louis - introduced de P Alasdair ., Saint of - C , - Graham Robichaud . . Fernand
 , P Louis de P Louis - - Brunswick C Hon , ., Fernand ., . . - . Hon . C between J P Hon introduced Graham New . Robichaud . - . Robichaud . of B Saint and Alasdair Kent , , , . C
 Kent P . Brunswick P - Robichaud . and Alasdair ., Hon B C . - Louis New . introduced . Saint Graham P . , - Louis . , . ., de C J Hon - , , , Robichaud of Fernand . Hon C between
 J , B . Hon Robichaud Saint , New Graham - C Louis - . Louis P C Hon P - Hon ., Fernand . . ., . between - and de . of Kent . P C , . , Robichaud , introduced Brunswick Alasdair .
Now they want to create a super-RRSP, which does not make any sense because, not only is it at odds with what they said in committee and what they said in the election campaign, it does not fit into their tax plan. 
Remember, they have a tax plan with a flat tax. 
With the flat tax, you reduce the amount of exemptions. 
We are not getting any ideas from them.  
Now I will turn to the Liberals.  
Senator Gigantès :
Be careful.  
Senator Tkachuk :
Since taking office, they have taken $300 million in new taxes from senior citizens by income-testing the age credit. 
They want Canadians to mature their RRSPs by the year they turn 69 rather than the previous age limit of 71. 
However, seniors do not know about it, and this will be another huge tax grab - Merry Christmas, Canada - by the Liberal Government and Paul Martin. 
Twice they have killed plans to increase the RRSP contribution limits so that people could put money away for their future given that the government will not provide for them.  
The Canadian Association of Retired Persons says that as many as 80,000 Canadians may fail to convert their RRSPs on time. 
Where are the big advertising programs of the Government of Canada which they mount when they really want to advertise something? 
This is a government program they do not want to advertise. 
They want it to slip in, just like this bill, so that people will not know and will not make the proper financial decisions, but instead will be exposed to a huge tax load for the year 1997. 
That is what Paul Martin wants, so that in February he can brag in his budget speech about how he has cleaned up the deficit - on the backs of the unemployed, on the backs of senior citizens, and on the backs of young people who will be paying the $400 million to the new pension plan.  
Senator Gigantès :
That is because over nine years you did nothing to address the deficit.  
Senator Tkachuk :
 Hon . Fernand Robichaud P . C ., of Saint - Louis - de - Kent , New Brunswick , introduced between Hon . B . Alasdair Graham , P . C ., and Hon . Louis - J . Robichaud , P . C .
 P Louis Fernand introduced J - . P . and . Hon . Robichaud , P . Hon New - , Graham , ., . between Alasdair C . Saint Kent . of . Robichaud - - Brunswick , C Louis Hon C ., , B
 Fernand . . P Louis , - Alasdair - - B Hon P Brunswick C Graham New introduced between . , , ., ., Robichaud . . . Hon . J , - de . C , Robichaud Kent Hon Louis Saint . and of C
 between Saint Graham Louis - . . P Robichaud ., Louis C Kent Hon Alasdair C . , P - B Fernand . ., . - , of . . de J P Brunswick C New - , introduced . Robichaud . , and , Hon
Hon. Catherine S. Callbeck , of Central Bedeque, Prince Edward Island, introduced between Hon. B. Alasdair Graham, P.C., and Hon. M. Lorne Bonnell.  
 M Alasdair introduced . Catherine Graham Prince , . ., and Hon Bonnell Callbeck Hon B Bedeque Island Lorne C , . , Hon between . of . . . S Edward Central . P ,
 B , Alasdair . introduced Hon Callbeck Catherine , Island . Hon . Edward . P Bonnell Lorne C M Graham , , . ., of between Bedeque Central . Prince . and Hon . S
 . Edward . . , Graham Hon . Catherine , of S Callbeck introduced B Alasdair Island Prince between . . Lorne Hon C Central P , . ., , Bedeque and M . Hon Bonnell
 Hon Lorne Island . Edward of Graham . Prince introduced , . , . , . C Central Bonnell Bedeque . M between Hon B . . and Callbeck ., , Catherine Alasdair S Hon P
 . ., between M P . Lorne . of Alasdair . Prince Hon . , , C Catherine and B Hon Central S Callbeck . Island Graham Hon Edward introduced Bonnell Bedeque , . , .
 Edward . , Hon . S . of . Hon Callbeck B introduced C . Catherine Bedeque Central Bonnell Lorne and Island . between . , ., , , Hon Alasdair M . P Prince Graham
 Hon Bedeque between , B Edward Central Alasdair M Bonnell Callbeck of Island . Graham Hon . Lorne ., . C . . S and introduced , , P . , . . Prince Catherine Hon
 ., Central B C M , Hon Hon between , , Catherine . Bonnell . Prince Bedeque . of Island Graham , P Alasdair Hon S . Lorne introduced . . and Edward . Callbeck .
 M between Lorne C Hon Hon . B Alasdair Hon Prince . . , introduced of Island Edward . P Bonnell , . Central . Bedeque . ., Graham , and . S Catherine , Callbeck
 and M P . Hon Alasdair , Lorne S . between Catherine Edward C Island Prince . Callbeck , . , Graham . ., . . of Hon Central B introduced Bedeque Bonnell , Hon .
 Lorne M Graham Alasdair . , . . S P . of Central , . Bonnell Callbeck Bedeque , and between . Prince Edward Hon ., Hon Hon C . . B introduced , Island Catherine
 of introduced B . Island Edward Catherine Bonnell Hon Hon M . and Alasdair Bedeque P . , ., Central Lorne Graham . Callbeck . . , , . . S , C between Hon Prince
 Hon introduced between . P Bedeque Lorne , ., . Graham Hon . Edward . , , of Island , and . Prince Catherine M Callbeck C Central Bonnell . . B S . Alasdair Hon
 between , M Island Bedeque Central Prince Alasdair introduced Edward . . Hon Bonnell P B of ., . Lorne , Callbeck . . S Hon Graham . and Hon Catherine C . , . ,
 . and Alasdair Catherine , , introduced Hon Bedeque Hon . M of . . Island Hon Edward B . ., Graham . C Bonnell P between S Lorne . . , Prince , Central Callbeck
 M Hon . Bedeque Alasdair . . . , Island Hon ., between Bonnell and S P Callbeck . of , Lorne . Edward Prince , Graham Central , . C Catherine Hon introduced . B
As Senator Cools pointed out, no statute was broken. 
Therefore, the federal requirement that all federal laws must comply with the Charter of Rights and Freedoms was not affected.  
Yesterday, Senator Beaudoin was explaining the different parts of the Constitution, the British North America Act of 1867, the Charter of Rights, and so on. 
At times, it appears the Supreme Court of Canada considers that the Constitution consists only of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 
Despite all the evidence - the stolen truck, the blood on the accused - the judges were only interested in one thing, and that was the arrest warrant. 
There was no warrant because the police acted on the spot when they had the accused, and I think they acted quite properly.  
Honourable senators, the Supreme Court ignored the rights of Mr. Boyle. 
Section 7 of the Charter indicates that Mr. Boyle had the right to life, privacy and security of the person, and those rights were not to be taken from him except by and in accordance with the principles of fundamental justice.  
I think the justices of the Supreme Court of Canada should be sent a message reminding them that the victim also had rights under the Charter.  
In all fairness, honourable senators, I must say that three of the justices dissented with the majority decision. 
They felt the police action had no bearing or outcome on the decision. 
The chief justice came down the middle and quoted the decision made by former chief justice Brian Dickson, which I understand finds that, if the subject is not spelled out in the Constitution, it is implied as being there. 
However, there again, that is merely my interpretation.  
I emphasize again that Mr. Boyle had the right to his life. 
He had the right to have a vehicle and operate it, and he had the right to have money in his possession. 
All those were taken away from him, and all the Supreme Court of Canada could think of was that piece of paper called a "warrant" and to criticize the police for not having such a document.  
I wanted to suggest that perhaps criminals should apply for a warrant before they commit murder, but I do not want to pursue that because I am afraid that some Charter judge will give them a warrant or a licence to do so. 
Fifteen years ago, I would have been shocked at criticism of a decision rendered by the Supreme Court; but, today that is commonplace. 
When a major decision comes down from the Supreme Court, the media is there to interview people who wish to comment, mostly negatively, on the decision. 
As I stated, we would not have seen a headline like that 15 years ago.  
 Hon . Catherine S . Callbeck , of Central Bedeque , Prince Edward Island , introduced between Hon . B . Alasdair Graham , P . C ., and Hon . M . Lorne .
 . . Alasdair . . Edward , Hon , Island , C M S Hon Hon Catherine Callbeck between introduced Graham . . of Bonnell B Bedeque and . . Lorne P Prince Central ,
 Bonnell between M . S Bedeque Central . . Island Graham . , . , and Prince B Alasdair Catherine ., Edward . . C Hon , Callbeck . of introduced Lorne P Hon ,
 , of Hon introduced Hon Bedeque B Edward Central , ., Island Prince . S . P Graham Alasdair . Bonnell , between Catherine . . . M , C . and Lorne . Callbeck
Hon. Marisa Ferretti Barth , of Repentigny, Quebec, introduced between Hon. B. Alasdair Graham, P.C., and Hon. Lise Bacon.  
 B Graham Hon . ., Ferretti C Bacon Hon . , P . Hon and , Barth . Marisa introduced of , Lise Quebec . between , Alasdair Repentigny .
 Alasdair Quebec , Repentigny P . , Hon Lise . Barth , of C between . Ferretti Graham Hon Hon . B introduced Marisa Bacon and ., . , .
 , of Lise Hon . Barth introduced Bacon , ., . between Alasdair . B C Ferretti Hon Hon , Marisa Repentigny P Graham . Quebec . and . ,
 C Alasdair . Ferretti Barth Repentigny and between , ., P . Lise , Marisa Hon introduced . Quebec Bacon B Hon . , , Hon . Graham . of
 C Marisa Ferretti Quebec . P B Bacon Alasdair Barth of . Lise Repentigny . . ., . Hon introduced , and , , between . Hon Graham , Hon
 , Quebec B Hon . . , Marisa Barth Alasdair Hon Lise Graham and Ferretti . of , Repentigny P . between introduced . . Hon ., Bacon C ,
 Barth Alasdair ., , Hon of B Hon and Lise Quebec . C between . . Ferretti , , Bacon , Hon . . Graham P Repentigny introduced . Marisa
 Lise and . . , Graham P Marisa , Repentigny , Ferretti Alasdair between Quebec . . . Hon Hon ., introduced of Bacon Barth . Hon C B ,
 Graham of Lise introduced , . Marisa Repentigny Quebec Ferretti . P Bacon Barth . Hon , and . between . Alasdair , Hon . C Hon B ., ,
 Hon , C Graham ., Alasdair . , Marisa B between . Lise . Hon Barth . Bacon and . Hon . Ferretti P introduced Quebec of , Repentigny ,
 C Bacon . introduced Quebec , and , Hon , Hon . Marisa ., . B of , . Repentigny Hon between Alasdair Lise Graham . P Ferretti . Barth
 Bacon and Graham Hon B introduced Quebec of . Barth Lise . between Alasdair P Hon . C Ferretti Repentigny , , . , , . Marisa . ., Hon
 . . C . Quebec P . , Hon introduced , ., Marisa , Repentigny Hon Alasdair . Bacon , Graham B and of Barth Ferretti between Hon Lise .
 , C . , Bacon . Repentigny of Quebec . introduced Barth . and Hon Ferretti between Alasdair P Hon Graham , ., . Hon . Lise , B Marisa
 , of Quebec B introduced Bacon C Barth Marisa . Hon , . Hon . Alasdair Ferretti Graham ., Repentigny P Hon , and . . . Lise , between
 , Ferretti . Lise C Hon , ., . Alasdair . Hon Hon and . , Graham introduced Barth B Marisa , P Quebec . Bacon . between of Repentigny
It is simply paying more money for less benefits. 
Anyone can do that. 
Even the Liberals can do that.  
The government is unable to manage the present program so it wants more money to enable it to manage it better. 
We must remember that the author of Bill C-2 is Paul Martin. 
Paul Martin is a real smart guy. 
We remember that he had to stoop to bribing three Atlantic provinces, with other people's money, to fulfil his promises of harmonization. 
He later apologized to the Canadian people for misinforming them.  
Meanwhile, the Prime Minister and Deputy Prime Minister, Sheila Copps, were promising to get rid of the GST, but they did not really mean it, they said, although they were caught out on tape not telling the truth.  
Paul Martin promised in the old Red Book that the government would cancel the helicopter purchase and use the money to pay for more social programs. 
Now, $900 million later, we have no helicopters that fly safely. 
He penned the Red Book to renegotiate the free trade agreement. 
He took all the kudos after the 1993 election.  
Now he says: "Rush Bill C-2. 
Trust me." 
The minister says that he needs the bill now to satisfy an agreement with the provinces. 
I have heard of no agreement. 
No one here has heard of an agreement. 
If someone on the other side knows of an agreement, please tell me.  
We have not heard one province asking us to abandon our parliamentary responsibilities and rush this bill through by January 1 on the threat that they will cancel their agreement. 
 Hon . Marisa Ferretti Barth , of Repentigny , Quebec , introduced between Hon . B . Alasdair Graham , P . C ., and . Lise Bacon .
 ., between Hon Alasdair Repentigny , , Graham B P and . Hon . Barth Ferretti Quebec Marisa . C , Lise . introduced of , Hon . Bacon
 introduced , Hon Bacon . B between P , ., Marisa Alasdair Graham C Repentigny Barth and Hon . . . Quebec . . , of Ferretti Lise Hon
 . Hon Hon , . Graham . Repentigny Barth . , C and Marisa Alasdair , introduced . P ., , . Hon between Quebec of Lise Bacon Ferretti
Hon. Sister Mary Alice (Peggy) Butts , Sydney, Nova Scotia, introduced between Hon. B. Alasdair Graham, P.C., and Hon. John B. Stewart.  
 Peggy . Nova John , Alasdair Sydney P Hon C Scotia . Sister . between Hon , . , B Alice B Mary Butts Stewart and , ) Hon ( introduced Graham ., . . .
 Butts . Sister , . P ., Alasdair , . Peggy Graham C Hon Hon Sydney B Hon John Nova , and B . Stewart Alice . Scotia . ( ) , Mary introduced . between
 . between Stewart , , ( Sydney . and Alice Hon Hon , . B ., C Alasdair . Mary ) P Sister Scotia Butts B . Graham Nova Peggy . , . introduced John Hon
 John Graham , . . Hon , Hon Scotia Sydney . ., Hon ) , Sister Peggy . ( and . Butts . introduced C B Stewart , P Alice B Alasdair between . Nova Mary
 . , Scotia . Sydney John introduced ., Nova Stewart . Graham B Sister ) P ( and Hon Mary Hon Hon between B Butts . , , . C Alasdair , . Alice . Peggy
 , Mary Hon , . B introduced P Sydney Nova Stewart . Scotia B Alasdair Graham C ( Butts , . Hon . . between John Alice , Sister . Peggy . ) ., Hon and
 . , . Sister C . Butts introduced Alice . ( Stewart and Sydney . B between ., Scotia Hon Alasdair Peggy John Nova Mary P Hon , Graham . B Hon , , . )
 Butts and ( . . Stewart . . Alasdair B Sister , Graham , P Peggy , Sydney , Nova ) Mary . ., Scotia . Hon B C between Hon John Alice introduced . Hon
 John . introduced B . Butts Sydney C , Alice ., Stewart Peggy Hon P ) Hon Nova Sister . Alasdair , , , B . between Hon Graham and . ( Scotia . . Mary
 , Peggy C . Hon John Hon Alasdair , ., B P ( . . Hon . Graham ) Butts Scotia Stewart , , between Sister and Alice Nova introduced . Sydney Mary . . B
 Hon Hon B . and introduced . . . ., Butts Alice P . Alasdair ( Graham ) Scotia Nova Sydney B . C , , Hon between Peggy Stewart . Sister Mary , John ,
 Sydney , B John . Stewart . Sister Hon ., C B Graham ( , Peggy , Scotia . Alice and ) , . between Nova . . P introduced Mary Alasdair Hon Butts Hon .
 Hon . Hon between Butts Sister . Nova , Alice C B . P Graham Sydney ) . Stewart and Alasdair Peggy B ( Mary introduced . ., , , . John Scotia , Hon .
 ) ( Hon , . Hon Alice . Graham P Mary Stewart , Scotia B Nova between Sister Hon introduced Peggy . B . , , John . ., C Alasdair . . and Sydney Butts
 P Alice Peggy ) Hon B introduced , C ( John . Sydney Stewart , Butts . ., between and Sister Alasdair . Graham . Nova . Hon , Mary Hon . B . Scotia ,
 , B ( . C John and . . Graham Alasdair P Hon . Nova Hon . Hon , introduced Butts Alice ) . , Scotia Stewart Sydney B Mary Sister . between , Peggy .,
Chile is a long, skinny country on the west coast of South America, and I really do believe they have a communications problem there as severe as ours. 
I told honourable senators the story of the finance minister in Chile, going on television every three weeks to a month, and breaking down the new plan into segments, talking to the people, because they all have television, and communicating in that fashion. 
That was the government's way of dealing with it in Chile. 
The only way to communicate is eyeball to eyeball. 
You have to get out and talk to people in their backyards. 
There is no great hurry for this bill to get through, at least not to the degree that you could not do that. 
Why not insist that your government take our committee out there to talk to your people?  
Senator Chalifoux :
We talked to the Conservative government about that for many years and nothing was done.  
Senator Comeau :
We are not in power now. 
You should push your people.  
On motion of Senator Gigantès, debate adjourned.  
Canada Cooperatives Bill 
First Reading 
The Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C-5, respecting cooperatives.  
Bill read first time.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
When shall this bill be read the second time?  
On motion of Senator Carstairs, bill placed on Orders of the Day for second reading on Thursday next, December 11, 1997.  
 Hon . Sister Mary Alice ( Peggy ) Butts , Sydney , Nova Scotia , introduced between Hon . B Alasdair Graham , P . C ., and Hon . John B . Stewart .
 . . and Sister . . John , Hon P Alasdair Hon Sydney . Alice , B Butts C Hon Scotia , , B ( Mary ) . introduced ., Nova . Graham Peggy Stewart
 between . Hon , . Hon Sydney Sister . Scotia , P , ( ) Butts Hon and , Alasdair C Mary . Graham B Alice . . B Peggy John introduced . Stewart Nova
 ( . Mary Graham Scotia Hon . , C ) , B Hon Sydney B . Nova . Stewart Butts . Sister . Hon introduced , Peggy and , between Alice P ., . John
The Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that each of the honourable senators named above had made and subscribed the declaration of qualification required by the Constitution Act, 1867, in the presence of the Clerk of the Senate, the Commissioner appointed to receive and witness the said declaration.  
 the declaration Act the the receive Constitution in subscribed Speaker honourable . of each Senate presence that of 1867 , named witness had informed to by qualification , Hon The the made of senators . and the above the Commissioner said Senate of appointed the the the the and required Clerk declaration ,
 of 1867 above Constitution by in Speaker the , of the declaration of said each the . appointed informed Senate and of to Senate Clerk . the the receive the the made the that declaration subscribed honourable , required named and Act witness Commissioner , had the qualification presence senators Hon The the
 the required and Hon Commissioner each of appointed receive the above the in Constitution the declaration Senate 1867 the of . , of witness of the said qualification the made that declaration senators to informed The the , , named the had the Act presence and by honourable . Clerk subscribed Senate Speaker
 Hon , the of said declaration presence Senate and The . the Senate , of the in the the and , declaration required Act of honourable the qualification 1867 witness made informed the Constitution the . receive Commissioner to above subscribed Speaker the by appointed senators each named of that had Clerk the
 named made the the above Speaker . the the of of Senate the the senators said Clerk Senate of the qualification Hon by receive , declaration had and informed , each of declaration The appointed 1867 Act and presence subscribed . the the witness , honourable Commissioner required to the Constitution that in
 Speaker in of to had witness the the declaration declaration , said The senators Act the the , above Constitution of by subscribed appointed honourable of Senate each made named qualification . required presence the Senate Clerk . receive 1867 and informed the Hon the and of Commissioner that , the the the
 qualification declaration above the the to honourable of the . by senators Senate , subscribed the the had in named and presence the Act and , of required . Constitution Clerk the the appointed , of Hon receive declaration each witness that the Senate Commissioner of made Speaker said informed 1867 the The
 required appointed to The 1867 witness the said receive , had subscribed the made of and Clerk honourable the that in the informed the the of the Senate of qualification presence . above declaration of Constitution by . each Speaker , the named Senate Hon Act senators and the Commissioner the declaration ,
 Commissioner and Clerk honourable said required the each of Constitution . subscribed qualification the Speaker the named the above Senate appointed made the in , senators informed The declaration and Act to receive , the the presence of of that 1867 declaration Senate of witness Hon the by , the the . had
 witness the Constitution the presence The the required of named each of of the informed declaration honourable subscribed Senate the in Speaker senators the . , declaration Senate and that had said Commissioner , , the the Clerk above Act made 1867 Hon the qualification . appointed the by to and of receive
 . of Clerk informed The . the made Constitution honourable named senators Senate qualification appointed and witness declaration and presence the the of Senate the , Act required 1867 said the , , each subscribed Speaker Commissioner the above declaration that Hon to the the of the had receive of in by the
 , to Commissioner Senate senators the . of the . declaration Hon witness and the informed required of the declaration the the above , said had the The honourable of Senate that Act each presence Speaker , 1867 made by qualification subscribed Constitution receive the Clerk and of in the named appointed the
 that qualification . informed the above made Act of the Constitution witness by of Clerk receive the in Senate 1867 said required declaration Speaker the named senators , of had the the The , to the the Hon presence Commissioner the each , honourable subscribed and . of appointed declaration the and Senate
 The Senate . Constitution the and to that made . declaration said the of witness required declaration the the Commissioner the 1867 Act Clerk each the the by of the informed honourable above had in of and subscribed the , Speaker appointed qualification the , Hon Senate named presence of , receive senators
 honourable qualification by above presence the . and Hon Constitution the Clerk the of Senate informed Senate Commissioner senators of of , of receive the to . the witness , declaration Act 1867 named the said in had and that each appointed the subscribed the the The required Speaker , declaration made the
 Hon the the had subscribed above the . appointed presence 1867 of and , required Senate the of Constitution said Clerk . informed and each receive declaration the the , made that The Senate the honourable the Act named of in Speaker the senators declaration Commissioner by , to witness qualification of the
He still had blood on his face and on his shirt. 
The police checked the trailer, and they found the money, stolen from Mr. Boyle, hidden under the mattress. 
They arrested Mr. Feeney under a warrantless arrest.  
I think that individual must have been trained by Sergeant Fiegenwald because there was certainly every reason to arrest Mr. Feeney.  
Prior to the Constitution Act, 1982, the police had that authority in the case of hot pursuit. 
It is my interpretation that they still possess that authority. 
It is not enshrined in the Criminal Code. 
It is one of those principles that came into our law from the British system. 
As Senator Cools pointed out, no statute was broken. 
Therefore, the federal requirement that all federal laws must comply with the Charter of Rights and Freedoms was not affected.  
Yesterday, Senator Beaudoin was explaining the different parts of the Constitution, the British North America Act of 1867, the Charter of Rights, and so on. 
At times, it appears the Supreme Court of Canada considers that the Constitution consists only of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 
Despite all the evidence - the stolen truck, the blood on the accused - the judges were only interested in one thing, and that was the arrest warrant. 
There was no warrant because the police acted on the spot when they had the accused, and I think they acted quite properly.  
Honourable senators, the Supreme Court ignored the rights of Mr. Boyle. 
Section 7 of the Charter indicates that Mr. Boyle had the right to life, privacy and security of the person, and those rights were not to be taken from him except by and in accordance with the principles of fundamental justice.  
I think the justices of the Supreme Court of Canada should be sent a message reminding them that the victim also had rights under the Charter.  
In all fairness, honourable senators, I must say that three of the justices dissented with the majority decision. 
They felt the police action had no bearing or outcome on the decision. 
The chief justice came down the middle and quoted the decision made by former chief justice Brian Dickson, which I understand finds that, if the subject is not spelled out in the Constitution, it is implied as being there. 
 The Hon . the Speaker informed the Senate that of the honourable senators named above had made and subscribed the declaration of qualification required by the Constitution Act , 1867 , in the presence of the Clerk of the Senate , the Commissioner appointed to receive and witness the said declaration .
 Act presence the made Constitution honourable , the senators qualification required of 1867 Senate declaration appointed the Commissioner and receive . and Hon Senate , declaration witness each the The . to named of by the the subscribed the Speaker informed that had in above said the the the of Clerk ,
 senators of receive Act , declaration honourable said to by made named and . witness the and that , 1867 each of of the subscribed the qualification the the declaration . , the had above appointed Hon the Clerk Commissioner presence Constitution required The the Senate informed Senate the the Speaker in
 in . above the the that of declaration and , subscribed declaration the Senate Act said the had of The senators Senate honourable Hon Clerk receive of the the Constitution made the the witness appointed to Commissioner informed , presence named and each qualification required by , the Speaker 1867 . of
The Senate adjourned until 2:30 p.m. 
 30 . until m Senate p The . adjourned : 2
 p 30 2 The adjourned : m until . . Senate
 adjourned p The . m 30 2 : Senate . until
 until adjourned p The . . 2 : 30 m Senate
 . 30 adjourned m : 2 The . until p Senate
 until Senate The : 30 . . adjourned 2 p m
 m . Senate 30 . The p : until 2 adjourned
 : until p . 30 adjourned . 2 Senate The m
 . The Senate adjourned . 2 30 p m : until
 adjourned p The . : 2 Senate 30 until . m
 . : . p adjourned 30 2 Senate m The until
 p adjourned The : . until . 30 m 2 Senate
 m . . 2 until adjourned : p 30 The Senate
 : The m until 30 2 adjourned . p Senate .
 . p : 30 The . until adjourned 2 m Senate
 adjourned : until . m 2 The . Senate 30 p
The following year, in 1999-2000, they will only be $3.748 billion. 
Yet, the government claimed yesterday that it was implementing a stable transfer system. 
In fact, cash payments paid to Quebec for health and education will be reduced by over $300 million over a five-year period. 
Honourable senators, I remind you that these cuts are in addition to this year's reduction of $700 million compared to last year. 
Could the minister make inquiries and inform the Senate of the reasons why, in spite of a cash floor set at $12.5 billion, Quebec's share will diminish by $307 million over the next five years?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
The federal government cut its own spending earlier, more drastically and in greater measure than transfers to the provinces. 
The government has made it clear that it will use increased fiscal flexibility to make strategic investments in priority areas, and action was taken early and directly on that commitment based on favourable fiscal results that emerged this past spring.  
With respect to individual provinces, I do not have those numbers. 
However, I would be happy to provide them for my honourable friend.  
Senator Roberge :
Could the minister find out at the same time why, in the same time period, Ontario's share of the cash transfers will increase to $173 million?  
Senator Graham :
Yes. 
While I am doing that, I should like to remind the honourable senator that even before the federal government balances the books, it is putting more money into transfers to the provinces. 
In fact, the government is raising the cash floor from $11 billion to $12.5 billion, the single largest reinvestment made by the federal government. 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Provinces-Effect on Atlantic Provinces 
Hon. Mabel M. DeWare :
Honourable senators, my figures show that, four years ago, the provinces received more than $19 billion in cash transfers for health, education and welfare through what was then known as the Canadian Assistance Program and Established Programs Financing. 
The government's math provides some good news, as the original plan was to give them even less.  
 The Senate adjourned until 2 : 30 p . m
 : 2 m adjourned Senate The . . 30 until
 . 30 until 2 . Senate : adjourned m The
 Senate The until : p . m 2 . 30
Second Sitting 
 Second Sitting
 Second Sitting
 Second Sitting
 Second Sitting
 Second Sitting
 Second Sitting
 Second Sitting
 Sitting Second
 Second Sitting
 Second Sitting
 Sitting Second
 Sitting Second
 Second Sitting
 Second Sitting
 Sitting Second
 Sitting Second
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
Motion agreed to.  
The Senate 
Conduct of Business-Notice of Inquiry 
Hon. William M. Kelly :
Honourable senators, I give notice: 
That on Thursday next, December 11, 1997, I will call the attention of the Senate to the way in which the Senate conducts its business.  
QUESTION PERIOD 
Federal-Provincial Relations 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Province of Quebec-Request for Particulars 
Hon. Fernand Roberge :
Honourable senators, my question follows the announcement made yesterday regarding the government's decision to set at $12.5 billion the cash floor for transfer payments made under the Canada health and social transfer (CHST). 
The government would have us believe that this amount represents an increase in health care payments. 
However, the figures indicate otherwise.  
The following year, in 1999-2000, they will only be $3.748 billion. 
Yet, the government claimed yesterday that it was implementing a stable transfer system. 
In fact, cash payments paid to Quebec for health and education will be reduced by over $300 million over a five-year period. 
Honourable senators, I remind you that these cuts are in addition to this year's reduction of $700 million compared to last year. 
Could the minister make inquiries and inform the Senate of the reasons why, in spite of a cash floor set at $12.5 billion, Quebec's share will diminish by $307 million over the next five years?  
 Second
 Second
 Second
 Sitting
The Senate met at 2.30 p.m., the Speaker in the Chair.  
 the The Speaker . ., at 30 the in . Chair p 2 met Senate m .
 ., at Senate . The the m met Chair 30 p . the 2 . in Speaker
 in ., . the . 30 at m . the The Senate Speaker Chair p 2 met
 The p the . 2 in . 30 . met m Speaker ., the at Senate Chair
 in p the Chair the 30 m 2 at . Senate Speaker met The ., . .
 m . Speaker The p Senate the in at the 30 . ., met 2 Chair .
 . Senate at The p the Chair ., 2 m 30 . met . in Speaker the
 m 30 the at Senate the met The Speaker in . . p ., 2 . Chair
 Senate . . p met The m at ., the in 30 2 Speaker Chair . the
 ., the 2 The m in Chair p the met Senate 30 . . at . Speaker
 The . p . the ., at . Chair the Speaker m 2 30 Senate in met
 in Chair m 2 p the the at Speaker The . . ., Senate met 30 .
 in . p 2 m Chair at the . the ., The Senate . met Speaker 30
 30 the . Chair ., met p m Senate The 2 the in Speaker . . at
 met m in Senate . 2 the at Chair the p . . Speaker 30 The .,
 Chair 30 the . in . p the 2 m met The . at Speaker ., Senate
Senator Grafstein :
The Province of Quebec, by its lawfully elected assembly, has requested a resolution amending the Constitution. 
How can I ask them to respect the Constitution if I do not respect the Constitution? 
I respect the Constitution.  
Honourable senators, this is a lawful request done in a lawful way. 
Perhaps certain words are egregious, but it is done in a lawful way, and I am prepared to support them. 
To my mind, the fact that they are prepared to proceed with their reforms before we legislate in any way, shape or form is their business; it is not my business. 
My business is to uphold the Constitution when they request we uphold processes under the Constitution.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
The reform of the school system in Quebec has nothing to do with the Constitution, even less with section 93. 
That was admitted in front of the committee.  
I will give you the answer to my question, and it should trouble all of us. 
The answer is that Quebec wants to be exempted from providing Catholic and Protestant teaching in the public school system. 
It has nothing to do with the linguistic school system, which will be in place - if the calendar is met - before the beginning of the next school year. 
They want to erase religious instruction from the school system, which is imposed on them. 
Narrow as it may be, unfair as it may be, and discriminatory as it may be, it was still renewed in 1982 and given protection from the Charter only 15 years ago. 
That is the reason. 
Do we want to be party to that?  
Do not mix up the reform of the system with the taking away of constitutional, legal rights of two identifiable religious faiths. 
That is what we are being asked to do.  
 Senate met at 2 . 30 p . m ., the Speaker in the Chair .
 in the the m . p met . at . 30 Senate ., The 2 Speaker
 met ., the The Speaker 2 Senate p . . 30 . m the Chair in
 m p met . in 30 Speaker ., the Senate the 2 Chair The . .
The Hon. the Speaker :
 . Speaker the : The Hon
 The . the : Hon Speaker
 . Hon Speaker : the The
 Speaker The : . Hon the
 : Speaker The . the Hon
 Speaker the The . : Hon
 The : Hon Speaker . the
 Speaker Hon The . : the
 : the The Speaker . Hon
 The the : Speaker Hon .
 Hon : the Speaker . The
 The : the Speaker Hon .
 . Speaker Hon : the The
 the Hon . The : Speaker
 Hon : Speaker the . The
 The the Hon Speaker . :
The premiers have insisted that they have some input into Ottawa's budget-making and how it allocates the surplus among new spending, tax cuts and debt repayment.  
In a telephone interview on Friday, Mr. Petter said the NDP government in British Columbia wants Ottawa to offset a dramatic increase in Canada Pension Plan premiums with reductions in UI premiums.  
"We're worried about the impact that Canada Pension Plan increases will have in terms of the burden they will impose on business and workers, and the potential they have to reduce job creation by a huge amount if they go ahead without some kind of offsetting relief," Mr. Petter said.  
Ontario's Conservative government is also demanding large cuts to UI premiums, Mr. Eves said in an interview...  
Alberta Treasurer Stockwell Day also indicated last week that he'll be pushing Mr. Martin for tax cuts.  
I predict today that, although this government has managed to get away with things for which our government would have been slaughtered, I think this bill, coupled with what is coming down the track and the changes in OAS and GIS, coupled with the arrogance of the stance taken at Kyoto, this is the kind of arrogance that, inevitably, will be the downfall of this government. 
I predict that that is about to happen.  
Hon. Thelma J. Chalifoux :
Honourable senators, I have a number of concerns regarding the statements of Senator Stratton. 
I would like to know what his position is on the working poor and on part-time workers. 
In this country, there are more part-time workers and more working poor than there are people who identify as middle class. 
What is the honourable senator's opinion on that?  
In this country, we have a totally isolated segment of society which is called "the mid-Canada corridor." 
Even in terms of communications, there is very little. 
What would the honourable senator do in the area of communication for those in isolated settlements regarding private pension plans? 
There are no words in Cree or michif for "private pension plan."  
I was a member of the working poor in 1965 and 1966 when this plan was put into force. 
I did not agree with the Canada Pension Plan. 
However, I will guarantee honourable senators right now that I totally agree with deductions being made, because now at least I have a pension.  
What will happen if this plan goes through is that the people in this country who really need it will get it. 
 The Hon . the :
 . : the The Hon
 the The Hon . Speaker
 the Hon : Speaker .
As there is no business before the Senate, is it your pleasure, honourable senators, that the Senate do now adjourn during pleasure to await the arrival of His Excellency the Governor General?  
 during that the await the His is now , Senate General senators the is adjourn your there honourable the Excellency do arrival Senate it , of before no ? to business , pleasure pleasure Governor As
 arrival pleasure do ? , , now the no As the it His Excellency of is to Governor pleasure the adjourn before during there your await business Senate that Senate senators the honourable is General ,
 His to your honourable the General before now senators that Excellency do , pleasure , of there pleasure , is ? the As Governor business Senate await Senate is it adjourn during the arrival no the
 His during pleasure it that no , Senate Senate do Governor Excellency arrival ? to the before the await the is the there business , is of adjourn pleasure your honourable now As , General senators
 honourable is senators arrival before no ? do now , As the business General , is to pleasure your there Excellency await during Senate it His Senate Governor the that of the , pleasure the adjourn
 , no the that senators honourable is Excellency there the the before , ? pleasure arrival pleasure the , is your Senate it adjourn await As Senate Governor of now General during business His do to
 His the As , adjourn that , arrival of General during your before to , it pleasure pleasure there is is do Senate honourable Excellency Senate senators await no the Governor now ? business the the
 As , await the senators General honourable do your no that ? during arrival is there adjourn the pleasure Senate , pleasure Senate Excellency it is , of before His business the Governor to now the
 the His Senate honourable the it is do Senate As Excellency of pleasure no during your is before business the arrival that ? now , Governor pleasure General there to , await senators , the adjourn
 now As before during General await , to the pleasure pleasure is the , arrival Excellency your ? there do Senate the adjourn Governor , that honourable it senators His Senate no business of the is
 Excellency , of General senators business during Senate there adjourn no the Governor the it await As is is your , Senate pleasure before arrival the ? His that do pleasure , to the now honourable
 His , await arrival is the , before ? the business Excellency do senators the Senate no it that there pleasure General adjourn Governor As the your , Senate to honourable of during is pleasure now
 Senate to it pleasure As Excellency that , His the before , the pleasure of the during adjourn is your arrival honourable General senators Governor await the now Senate , is ? business no there do
 before during the the now do pleasure the business , senators honourable , , ? it Excellency Senate pleasure that General to adjourn arrival Governor no is await of is your Senate As the His there
 no it , there Excellency pleasure pleasure , senators General the before , is to the is ? arrival your As during the adjourn business of His honourable that the Governor do Senate await Senate now
 now senators no that the honourable General do , of during to the is As His Excellency adjourn ? business there Governor the is pleasure arrival Senate Senate , , the your pleasure before await it
In 10 or 15 years, that $3,500 will be worth $1,500, $1,000, $500, depending on what government does and what happens to inflation.  
Senator Taylor :
Elect the Liberals and it will be high!  
Senator Tkachuk :
If we elect the Liberals, inflation will be high? 
We already know that! 
Let me continue in that vein. 
Perhaps honourable senators opposite do not want to hear what Paul Martin will be doing, and the explaining that you will have to do back home in 10 or 15 years when your children ask you what you did about this bill. 
When they retire, their CPP benefits will be worth about what they put in, plus 2.5 per cent.  
I do not get it. 
I do not understand why we are being asked to do that to our children, so that those who are retiring today can receive full benefits and those who are retiring soon can get their benefits. 
I do not get it. 
I will try to explain it today, and - I hope I can convince you.  
The CPP is part of a larger program that Paul Martin is introducing. 
Everything involves reform. 
We will have a reform of the Old Age Security benefit, which is coming up after Christmas. 
It is important to get through this before Christmas so that we can consider changes in the cut-backs that will come due after Christmas. 
We on this side think that both matters should be discussed together because it is part of a pension program and a part of a social security net for people in this country who retire at 65 and who want to retire with some dignity.  
We strongly believe that this measure is a payroll tax and a job killer. 
Yesterday, Senator Kirby said it was not a payroll tax. 
 As there is no business before the Senate , is it your pleasure , honourable senators , that the Senate do now adjourn during pleasure to await the arrival of His the Governor General ?
 adjourn is , the that it the arrival Governor , Excellency the ? is during there await now Senate , pleasure business the to His pleasure honourable do your senators before of no Senate As
 now is , Governor before it pleasure As your the His to business that the , ? of is adjourn , do there Excellency General arrival senators Senate no await the the during pleasure Senate
 arrival of Governor is , senators your As honourable do Excellency ? is the the business that it Senate the before now , await adjourn , His to no Senate pleasure the pleasure General during
The Senate adjourned during pleasure.  
 pleasure Senate . The adjourned during
 pleasure Senate during . adjourned The
 adjourned The during . pleasure Senate
 adjourned Senate during The . pleasure
 adjourned Senate during The pleasure .
 pleasure . adjourned The Senate during
 adjourned The pleasure Senate . during
 Senate during adjourned pleasure . The
 Senate The adjourned during pleasure .
 during adjourned Senate pleasure The .
 pleasure during Senate . The adjourned
 Senate . adjourned pleasure The during
 Senate pleasure . adjourned during The
 The . adjourned during pleasure Senate
 . adjourned pleasure during The Senate
 The during . adjourned pleasure Senate
I wish to speak specifically about the fact that we are dealing with elites as opposed to the groups they represent. 
We questioned these representatives during the hearings as to whether their underlying groups agreed with the position they had taken.  
On the Catholic side, we had the position of the archbishops, as limited as it was. 
We had Catholic school boards and Catholic teachers. 
I remember specifically cross-examining Catholic teachers and asking whether they had discussions with students and their parents respecting the changes. 
Their view was that they represented the broad consensus of parents and students as it applied to this amendment. 
All parents wanted a change to renovate the school system, and this was the best modality in which to do that.  
I agree with Senator Lynch-Staunton, Senator Wood and Senator Lavoie-Roux that this is not perfect. 
However, in addition to the evidence, we did refer to opinion polls that seemed to suggest a strong support for reform along these lines.  
Yes, the resolution is imperfect. 
We would like to have done it "our way," as Frank Sinatra used to say, but we must deal with the Province of Quebec in this case. 
We had to bend imperfect tools to see whether they fit our minimum requirements. 
In my view, they did not fit our minimum requirements; they fit our reasonable requirements for constitutional amendment.  
Senator Wood :
Is it not true in the letter from the bishops of Quebec - the letter the honourable senator read - that they were in favour of repealing section 93? 
They questioned linguistic rights and suggested that denominational guarantees established by 107 be maintained. 
There was a caveat there that my honourable friend forgot to read.  
Senator Grafstein :
I find myself in great difficulty defending Roman Catholic theology let alone letters from Roman Catholic archbishops. 
I will leave it to each senator to come to his or her own conclusion on the testimony and on the letters, which are appended to the report.  
 The Senate adjourned pleasure .
 adjourned The pleasure Senate .
 . during pleasure Senate The
 adjourned Senate pleasure . The
At 2:45 p.m., His Excellency the Governor General having come and being seated upon the Throne - 
 ., having 2 the come . p the and upon : m His Throne At General - being Excellency 45 Governor seated
 His 2 come the m At General Throne p - and . Excellency having 45 upon the ., Governor seated being :
 ., seated the : come m p General and At the His 45 Excellency Governor having Throne 2 being . - upon
 p the upon being General and At the 45 Excellency Throne - ., Governor : . having m seated His come 2
 seated At Throne ., Excellency - the 2 Governor the come His . and 45 p being General upon : having m
 45 . p come m and the upon having At being - Throne His General seated Excellency the Governor ., : 2
 - p being His m upon At the Governor and Excellency the having General : seated . ., 2 45 Throne come
 - . seated At 45 His come being upon Throne : m having 2 p Excellency the Governor the and ., General
 come Governor 2 45 General p the being having ., and seated m His - the At : Throne Excellency . upon
 come 45 Governor m the Throne 2 the . ., being seated : Excellency His and upon - At General having p
 45 ., seated General At - the 2 p upon : His and Excellency Throne m having come being the Governor .
 Excellency - the 2 General 45 having seated Governor come ., : and His upon . Throne m p At the being
 His Governor upon the and - having seated Excellency the m 45 Throne 2 p . General ., come At : being
 the upon Throne 2 and being Governor m p : ., come His 45 . General the Excellency At - having seated
 m having - His the General 45 Throne ., 2 come seated Excellency At . Governor the being and : p upon
 seated : - upon General 2 p At . Excellency 45 and Governor come having His ., the the m Throne being
I have a daughter who is 24 and a son who is 21. 
Many of you have children and grandchildren. 
The government is asking them to pay 9.9 per cent - I am sure it is 9.9 per cent because the minister wanted the number to be under the figure 10. That represents 10 per cent of their income, and it will increase with inflation. 
The $35,000 that they pay on today will inevitably be more tomorrow.  
As inflation eats away at it and the numbers rise, that number remains the same. 
This goes against everything we have ever done on this program since its inception in 1966. 
It stays the same. 
In 10 or 15 years, that $3,500 will be worth $1,500, $1,000, $500, depending on what government does and what happens to inflation.  
Senator Taylor :
Elect the Liberals and it will be high!  
Senator Tkachuk :
If we elect the Liberals, inflation will be high? 
We already know that! 
Let me continue in that vein. 
Perhaps honourable senators opposite do not want to hear what Paul Martin will be doing, and the explaining that you will have to do back home in 10 or 15 years when your children ask you what you did about this bill. 
When they retire, their CPP benefits will be worth about what they put in, plus 2.5 per cent.  
I do not get it. 
I do not understand why we are being asked to do that to our children, so that those who are retiring today can receive full benefits and those who are retiring soon can get their benefits. 
I do not get it. 
I will try to explain it today, and - I hope I can convince you.  
 At 2 : 45 p . m ., His Excellency the General having come and being seated upon the Throne -
 p Governor : come and 2 the - seated having At the m . upon Throne 45 His General ., Excellency
 2 Governor Excellency At p the 45 His upon being ., - Throne and the come m General : seated .
 - the ., Governor . At 2 His upon Excellency Throne General and p being m come seated having 45 :
The Hon. the Speaker said: 
 The . Speaker Hon : the said
 said Hon . Speaker : the The
 Hon the . Speaker The : said
 Speaker . Hon the : The said
 Hon The said : . Speaker the
 The said Hon . : the Speaker
 The . : Hon said the Speaker
 : Speaker Hon the The said .
 The the Hon Speaker said : .
 Hon Speaker . The : said the
 the said Speaker Hon The : .
 said . Hon Speaker the The :
 the Speaker . : Hon The said
 . Speaker the Hon : said The
 Hon said . The the Speaker :
 Hon The . said Speaker : the
Are they on ships at sea? 
We have 30 in the inventory.  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, the answer is yes, there are 30 helicopters in the inventory. 
As I indicated yesterday, 24 were cleared, and six remain to be inspected. 
They will be inspected by December 18.  
Of the 24 that were inspected, only two were found to be in need of repair. 
As to precisely where the other six are located, I would need to consult with the appropriate authorities at National Defence. 
I will bring forward an answer for my honourable friend.  
Senator Forrestall :
Was there any criticism from our NATO allies with respect to the grounding of these aircraft? 
My understanding is that these aircraft are at sea, and a number of them are engaged in some training exercises. 
Were we criticized for not being able to live up to our obligations?  
Senator Graham :
Not to my knowledge. 
It is my understanding that those helicopters are at sea on exercises. 
As to precisely where they are, on whatever ocean, I cannot positively say. 
It might be a military secret, as a matter of fact.  
Federal-Provincial Relations 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Atlantic Provinces Equal to Increase in Social Transfers-Government Position 
 The Hon . the Speaker :
 Speaker : The the . said
 : The . said Speaker the
 The Hon . Speaker the :
Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod, 
 the Usher Rod of Black Gentleman ,
 Gentleman the of Rod Usher , Black
 Gentleman of Black Usher , the Rod
 Gentleman Usher the Black of Rod ,
 Usher Rod , of Gentleman the Black
 , the of Gentleman Rod Black Usher
 of Black the Usher Gentleman Rod ,
 Black Rod Usher Gentleman the , of
 of Usher the Gentleman Black Rod ,
 Usher Gentleman Rod the , of Black
 Usher of Gentleman , Black Rod the
 Rod Usher , Gentleman Black the of
 Black Usher Gentleman the Rod of ,
 the of Gentleman Rod Black Usher ,
 , the Rod of Black Gentleman Usher
 Gentleman , of Black the Rod Usher
Anyone can do that. 
Even the Liberals can do that.  
The government is unable to manage the present program so it wants more money to enable it to manage it better. 
We must remember that the author of Bill C-2 is Paul Martin. 
Paul Martin is a real smart guy. 
We remember that he had to stoop to bribing three Atlantic provinces, with other people's money, to fulfil his promises of harmonization. 
He later apologized to the Canadian people for misinforming them.  
Meanwhile, the Prime Minister and Deputy Prime Minister, Sheila Copps, were promising to get rid of the GST, but they did not really mean it, they said, although they were caught out on tape not telling the truth.  
Paul Martin promised in the old Red Book that the government would cancel the helicopter purchase and use the money to pay for more social programs. 
Now, $900 million later, we have no helicopters that fly safely. 
He penned the Red Book to renegotiate the free trade agreement. 
He took all the kudos after the 1993 election.  
Now he says: "Rush Bill C-2. 
Trust me." 
The minister says that he needs the bill now to satisfy an agreement with the provinces. 
I have heard of no agreement. 
No one here has heard of an agreement. 
If someone on the other side knows of an agreement, please tell me.  
We have not heard one province asking us to abandon our parliamentary responsibilities and rush this bill through by January 1 on the threat that they will cancel their agreement. 
The Minister of Finance is rushing so that he can get another $400 million in taxes for the 1997 tax year. 
 Gentleman Usher of the Rod ,
 the Usher Rod Gentleman , Black
 Black the , of Usher Rod
 , Rod the Usher of Gentleman
You will proceed to the House of Commons and acquaint that House that it is the pleasure of His Excellency the Governor General that they attend him immediately in the Senate Chamber.  
 House will that attend the the they acquaint him is proceed of that . House pleasure it Chamber the Commons You immediately that Senate the and His General to of Governor in Excellency
 . proceed immediately Governor of the Commons the House is pleasure they Excellency the it General him of Chamber the that attend His You and House to in that will that acquaint Senate
 that to him the that proceed immediately is General of His Chamber pleasure Excellency House acquaint attend they Governor and You House the the . Senate of Commons the it in will that
 the of they House that that Governor pleasure that You House General the of Chamber Excellency the the Commons to him and attend is proceed immediately in Senate will . acquaint it His
 Governor Chamber pleasure they His is of it Excellency attend You that Senate will House of proceed that General the the the Commons that him House in . to the and immediately acquaint
 of the . attend that You of Commons the that Senate House His pleasure will Chamber the acquaint immediately is they and proceed General to House it him Excellency the that in Governor
 attend His House Chamber is of will of Senate . that proceed Governor they the the Excellency acquaint Commons and that General that to the the You pleasure him it House immediately in
 is the to they immediately acquaint attend it You His House and of him Excellency Commons the General the that will in that House Senate proceed of the pleasure . that Governor Chamber
 Excellency Commons is of acquaint immediately Governor it that Senate General the in His the the Chamber You attend to the pleasure of and . that will they that House proceed House him
 of that Chamber acquaint him immediately the House will Commons and Senate pleasure . You they House in Governor the that the of attend His General it that proceed to the Excellency is
 him proceed of the that to it His is Commons acquaint in of House the Excellency that that the Senate immediately House Governor they pleasure and Chamber attend You the will General .
 of the proceed Chamber him attend General it and House the they is pleasure . House of Senate acquaint the His that in immediately Governor that You to will Excellency Commons the that
 the him His the the . Governor will of is it You and attend Senate the acquaint Excellency that to General they immediately House that House of Chamber in pleasure proceed that Commons
 Chamber proceed it acquaint . General the the His they the Senate House pleasure You of will that House of Excellency to and that the Governor is Commons attend immediately that him in
 . the to that Senate proceed the Chamber House the and him will Commons Governor of they House General is acquaint attend it pleasure of in the immediately His that that You Excellency
 they the Chamber attend the General acquaint to that and that the Governor it will His House of proceed in the Senate that House . is You pleasure Excellency immediately of him Commons
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
Second Reading-Debate Continued 
Canada Cooperatives Bill 
First Reading 
Criminal Code 
Interpretation Act 
Bill to Amend-Second Reading-Motions in Amendment-Debate Adjourned to Await Ruling of Speaker 
Motion in Sub-Amendment 
Quebec 
Linguistic School Boards-Amendment to Section 93 of Constitution-Report of Special Joint Committee Adopted 
Quebec 
Linguistic School Boards-Motion to Amend Section 93 of Constitution-Debate Adjourned 
Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration 
Sixth Report of Committee Adopted 
Bill to Amend-First Reading 
Canada Marine Bill 
First Reading 
Aboriginal Peoples 
Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples-Committee Authorized to Study Recommendations 
THE SENATE 
 You will proceed to the House of Commons and acquaint that House that it is pleasure of His Excellency the Governor General that they attend him immediately in the Senate Chamber .
 You proceed immediately House acquaint the and in Excellency the they of of . Governor to that His General the pleasure is the House him will that it Commons attend Chamber Senate
 they You Chamber pleasure is . the that immediately General to proceed it Senate attend the House that that of the in Governor and His Commons him House the Excellency will of
 to proceed will the of . His General that it attend Senate of the and that that in him House the pleasure the Chamber they Governor is You Commons acquaint House Excellency
The House of Commons being come, 
 Commons House The , come of being
 of , come House The Commons being
 being Commons of House come The ,
 being House come , The of Commons
 The come House Commons being , of
 being , Commons of House come The
 come of House Commons The , being
 of come , The House Commons being
 , Commons being of come House The
 Commons House , come of The being
 Commons being The , come of House
 The of Commons come , being House
 Commons , The being House come of
 being of , The Commons come House
 come , being The House Commons of
 The House of Commons , come being
I then went on to say: 
If I may, I will quote from The Financial Post of today, November 26, a 1997. 
An editorial entitled "EI surplus is a deficit-reduction tax" states clearly that the EI will result: 
...in an accumulated surplus suspected to top a scandalous $19 billion by the end of 1998. 
If you need $8 billion to look after a recession, using the last recession as the example, what kind of recession are you planning on?  
That is to say, what kind of recession are they planning on in the future with a reserve of $18 billion?  
Provincial finance ministers met in Ottawa. 
I think last night they had dinner with Finance Minister Paul Martin. 
In an article in The Globe and Mail yesterday, it was stated: 
With Ontario's Ernie Eves and B.C.'s Andrew Petter leading the charge, the provincial ministers have made it clear that they consider Mr. Martin's recent $1.4 billion cut to unemployment insurance premiums insufficient...  
The premiers have insisted that they have some input into Ottawa's budget-making and how it allocates the surplus among new spending, tax cuts and debt repayment.  
In a telephone interview on Friday, Mr. Petter said the NDP government in British Columbia wants Ottawa to offset a dramatic increase in Canada Pension Plan premiums with reductions in UI premiums.  
"We're worried about the impact that Canada Pension Plan increases will have in terms of the burden they will impose on business and workers, and the potential they have to reduce job creation by a huge amount if they go ahead without some kind of offsetting relief," Mr. Petter said.  
Ontario's Conservative government is also demanding large cuts to UI premiums, Mr. Eves said in an interview...  
Alberta Treasurer Stockwell Day also indicated last week that he'll be pushing Mr. Martin for tax cuts.  
I predict today that, although this government has managed to get away with things for which our government would have been slaughtered, I think this bill, coupled with what is coming down the track and the changes in OAS and GIS, coupled with the arrogance of the stance taken at Kyoto, this is the kind of arrogance that, inevitably, will be the downfall of this government. 
I predict that that is about to happen.  
Hon. Thelma J. Chalifoux :
Honourable senators, I have a number of concerns regarding the statements of Senator Stratton. 
I would like to know what his position is on the working poor and on part-time workers. 
 The House Commons being come ,
 The come Commons House being ,
 Commons come of being , House
 come The being Commons , of
Their Speaker , the Hon. Gilbert Parent, said: 
 Parent , Their said Gilbert , Speaker the Hon . :
 Their the said : , Gilbert Hon . Parent Speaker ,
 said , the Their Hon : , Speaker Gilbert Parent .
 , . Speaker Their : , Gilbert said Hon the Parent
 , . Their said Parent the Speaker Gilbert : , Hon
 : , Parent Their said Gilbert Hon , Speaker . the
 : , . said Speaker Gilbert the Parent Their , Hon
 the said Gilbert Speaker , Hon Their . : , Parent
 , Parent Speaker Hon . Their said Gilbert : , the
 , Their the Parent Hon said Gilbert Speaker , : .
 : , Hon Their Speaker said . Gilbert , Parent the
 Gilbert the : Hon , said Their Speaker Parent . ,
 . Gilbert , : , said Parent Their Hon Speaker the
 Speaker Gilbert the . : , Their , said Hon Parent
 , Speaker : Gilbert Parent said the Their . , Hon
 said , Hon Their : . Parent the Speaker , Gilbert
Benefits were provided to male and female contributors, to surviving spouses and dependent children. 
However, instead of taking it out of general revenue, the government took it out of the CPP because, in the old days, there was lots of money in that fund. 
There were not as many old people. 
There was a great number of working people, and lots of cash. 
They said, "We can throw it around." 
No one was thinking what would happen when people in the large demographic group turned 65.  
The amendments provided for the elimination of CPP children's benefits which previously applied - they changed it again - where more than four children of a deceased or disabled contributor had been eligible for such benefits. 
Now, if you have more than four kids, that is fine, too. 
However, it was another increased cost to what should be a pension plan. 
The government should have taken the money out of something else, or increased the amount of CPP premiums so that people were told the truth, and also told, "To pay for this it will cost you 10 cents or 20 cents more a month." 
The cash was there, so they used that cash.  
Legislation was enacted for spousal credits. 
When people get divorced, they have to keep up with the times. 
They can split the benefits. 
That was not done before. 
At the inception of this program, that was not allowed.  
Because men die earlier and women live longer, the money went mostly to women. 
It costs more money. 
I am not saying that is bad. 
I am just saying that all of a sudden it costs more money because women are either lucky or live better or cleaner lives than men, and they live longer.  
 Their Speaker , the Hon . Parent , said :
 . Hon Gilbert Parent : Speaker said Their , ,
 Hon : , , Gilbert the Parent Their said Speaker
 said , Their Hon , Parent : Gilbert Speaker .
May it please Your Excellency, 
 please Excellency May , it Your
 May it please , Excellency Your
 Excellency it , Your please May
 May it Excellency , please Your
 , Your Excellency it May please
 Your , May Excellency please it
 Excellency please May Your , it
 , May Your Excellency please it
 Your please it , May Excellency
 Your it , May please Excellency
 it Excellency please Your , May
 please , Excellency May it Your
 it May please Your , Excellency
 May please , Your Excellency it
 Your , May it please Excellency
 , Your it May Excellency please
Senator Grafstein :
I find myself in great difficulty defending Roman Catholic theology let alone letters from Roman Catholic archbishops. 
I will leave it to each senator to come to his or her own conclusion on the testimony and on the letters, which are appended to the report.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Honourable senators, Senator Grafstein is quite right in stating that reform is needed. 
Actually, reform is well under way in Quebec. 
The new system, it seems, will be in place for the next school year. 
New linguistic boards will be set up. 
There will be some difficulties, but, overall, it is proceeding quite well.  
What linkage is there between the new school system in Quebec and the request to exempt Quebec from certain obligations of section 93? 
I do not see any.  
Senator Grafstein :
Honourable senators, there is constitutional law. 
Quebec wants to proceed by the rule of law. 
They are seeking to renovate their system under the rule of law and the Constitution.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
That is not my question.  
Senator Grafstein :
I assume that if they choose to proceed, they can. 
However, why should we in the Senate allow any province to proceed in a way that we consider unlawful? 
 May it please Your Excellency
 Excellency it May Your please
 May Excellency it please Your
 it , Your please May
The House of Commons has elected me their Speaker, though I am but little able to fulfil the important duties thus assigned to me. 
 House , I Commons . their to important Speaker but me elected the duties assigned The little has to thus of able me am though fulfil
 I , little though the duties has thus fulfil assigned Speaker The to to House important elected me able Commons me . but am of their
 to able the though of thus but I little has me Speaker House their me assigned Commons to fulfil The elected am duties , . important
 am Speaker . has elected duties little their to The thus assigned Commons I me fulfil able of to though important , House the but me
 little to but duties . I The to their important of has Speaker able assigned thus , the am elected though me me fulfil Commons House
 to me has though assigned of elected able , the . but me little duties Commons fulfil their Speaker I important House thus to am The
 but important , able . their me the me thus has to duties Speaker little Commons fulfil elected am to though I of The House assigned
 assigned me , of to duties me . able I The has am important elected Speaker the but their thus though Commons to little fulfil House
 thus House to their elected Commons Speaker though . the little The of I me but to me assigned am able important duties , fulfil has
 important but of , me the duties though assigned House little me to their am elected Speaker Commons I The able to fulfil thus has .
 , but elected me House Commons I Speaker little though thus assigned duties of to me . important the am fulfil able their to has The
 am important duties me me fulfil , . though their but little of able assigned The has elected to thus Speaker Commons to I the House
 thus but though elected me to their little House . has fulfil the important The assigned , duties me am able to I Speaker of Commons
 assigned duties the their elected . Commons though important but me Speaker The to am to has thus I , able fulfil me little of House
 important thus little but Speaker of The able am me has House elected their the fulfil to Commons to duties though assigned , . I me
 me the to elected fulfil Commons assigned their . House important thus little Speaker of able though to me but has am , I duties The
Motion in Sub-Amendment 
Hon. Orville H. Phillips :
Therefore, I move: 
That the motion in amendment be amended by deleting the word "and" at the end of paragraph ( b ) and by adding the following after paragraph ( c ): 
( d ) the Court, by its Order of November 19, 1997 that Bill C-16 must be enacted by December 19, 1997, is impeding proceedings in Parliament and is subordinating the Senate of Canada; and 
( e ) the Court is usurping the royal prerogative of the Sovereign who, with the advice and consent of Parliament, keeps and upholds the Queen's Peace and the public peace and security of all.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, I have a problem. 
Offhand, I do not know if you can amend a reasoned amendment. 
I must look at the precedents. 
Debate adjourned to await the ruling of the Speaker. 
Quebec 
Linguistic School Boards-Amendment to Section 93 of Constitution-Report of Special Joint Committee Adopted 
On the Order: 
Resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Pépin, seconded by the Honourable Senator Lucier, for the adoption of the Report of the Special Joint Committee to Amend Section 93 of the Constitution Act, 1867 concerning the Quebec School System, deposited with the Clerk of the Senate on November 7, 1997.  
Hon. John Lynch-Staunton (Leader of the Opposition) :
Honourable senators, I would like first of all to thank the co-chairmen of the joint committee, our colleague Senator Lucie Pépin, and the other co-chairman, MP Denis Paradis, for their excellent work in rather exceptional and sometimes trying circumstances.  
In fact, as has been said here and elsewhere, considering the decision of the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs that government support for the amendment to section 93 of the Constitution was already an established fact and that the government majority in committee left no doubt as to what conclusions it would reach, the committee's role could have been limited to that of a rubber stamp.  
Furthermore, the committee was not allowed to hold hearings outside Ottawa and was required to table its report no later than November 7, 1997, with only three weeks to hear witnesses and prepare its report. 
What a contrast with the extremely slow process followed by many less important bills that gather dust for months on parliamentary shelves before receiving Royal Assent.  
 The House of Commons has elected me their Speaker , though I am but able to fulfil the important duties thus assigned to me .
 fulfil to . me little thus the to though duties of am assigned Commons has their able Speaker but important The , I elected me
 fulfil has . to duties I The important Speaker me thus of , elected though assigned their the House little Commons me but am to
 fulfil important duties me to me I . assigned thus able though , of their Speaker but am elected little House to The the Commons
If, in the performance of those duties, I should at any time fall into error, I pray that the fault may be imputed to me, and not to the Commons, whose servant I am, and who, through me, the better to enable them to discharge their duty to their Queen and Country, humbly claim all their undoubted rights and privileges, especially that they may have freedom of speech in their debates, access to Your Excellency's person at all seasonable times, and that their proceedings may receive from Your Excellency the most favourable construction.  
 am of claim and those especially and be If at that construction not the me I that , duty fault Your of to from time pray imputed to servant their all they them freedom and that to favourable , and may Queen may Excellency to whose s their the the person proceedings , their to , through I , discharge Excellency Commons duties me into rights their Country , humbly debates , ' to all undoubted better , , most seasonable at performance access speech , I times privileges the in may fall . enable error who , , and Your have their in any the receive should
 the , fault , favourable s , Queen the be in and in may the construction Country and all fall imputed me who they , seasonable person Excellency and performance , any Commons freedom If , I error Your that the at claim and , receive access of duty the am them that enable into . I and proceedings I that debates not to from their should rights time their , may to those to their me to pray their duties Your to times speech privileges most Excellency humbly of , servant better , to whose may discharge have their through especially at all undoubted , , '
 that and duties me their better . Your times , freedom s of debates in discharge , proceedings that , their and may not the Excellency be of any fault to to to to especially at If all person , favourable , they humbly , speech , the may the the most ' in rights and into who their servant Commons access should fall , whose I me error their to , I Country pray and Your all receive the , Excellency imputed and duty may privileges am to have those performance enable that undoubted construction time from their seasonable , them through Queen , claim at I
 , that performance me seasonable in to may and at be duty should claim into the that the imputed to , not . servant duties privileges , to the of undoubted , discharge , , may of any If access , receive me person to the pray all and to error especially Country freedom they debates Excellency the , them and s whose , rights their ' Commons most Your , Your all through and and their fault Excellency from enable I their may their those favourable Queen proceedings times construction am time have I better , in their to speech fall at who , humbly that I
 may , discharge to person pray seasonable they from any and of freedom and time Commons to proceedings to and , and , in access be to may privileges those Your through I undoubted duty should s especially times that them their , me error , , claim the whose servant I at favourable I of receive Excellency their their am , the . the debates , not all that who into the , in imputed at me Excellency and to speech enable , , If that Your ' to their may rights fall humbly Country have most their construction performance fault better the , duties Queen all
 may any , , from receive I and pray claim may s undoubted fall Excellency , of If the fault to of who access that enable Excellency duty humbly duties , especially Country , all , person to that imputed proceedings their privileges discharge them their freedom the , their be should have time in me I and I they , their not Your whose favourable error , may all most debates and Commons into and through Queen ' the seasonable better . that , at construction in those the and times rights to me performance to Your the , speech their servant , to to am at
 fall all . , , , the fault and Queen debates in to , who rights that their I undoubted be to through especially times favourable seasonable their am Your whose , pray those of humbly Commons me I may , to s most freedom person Your duty that the from have may receive imputed the servant they Excellency discharge , not speech and , at enable , If any I the into all to them the may in their and construction privileges time and that proceedings Excellency at me , and , , access their their of to Country ' to claim should error duties better performance
 duty , ' construction of , performance may and seasonable receive I , undoubted of enable not am who error to Your the in and them to If whose I Commons person the Country be in , through , those rights all duties any . that their all debates to that into proceedings , pray to access freedom from I may Excellency should discharge me privileges , and fall , and have that their fault they favourable their time at humbly their , s Your speech times servant the me imputed , the their , and better at Excellency may , claim especially to Queen the most to
 they to to may the through be that any undoubted privileges their and Excellency in . servant to receive their should and Your am fault proceedings seasonable debates into to ' of have to pray , s duty Your those , the from Excellency that rights may at , If all I favourable error to , Country especially their may not and construction humbly fall their their that , freedom most better at , , duties Queen discharge the whose , in of me all speech performance I times the enable access , who me Commons them I time and , , the imputed , claim and person
 s , , at especially fall I imputed that the their person performance humbly seasonable their through . ' better , all may Country receive the and proceedings may be favourable at in , Queen their times to , have to , into speech time privileges , and to them that If servant those rights the to discharge duties most of , access Commons who and fault enable their they claim the error , in duty construction all Your not pray any and I debates the undoubted Your , , me and Excellency to of may me Excellency to , from I am whose freedom their should that
 to me have of servant their through at who Commons receive , duties they enable of may , to may better especially am , , their at to all , and , not Country should If duty from and Excellency be and . all I undoubted those me , to in ' and I construction in any seasonable rights person most fall speech performance discharge , times Your privileges the , and into access Queen debates to fault that time , , that , the freedom their may whose Your to their that error humbly Excellency favourable claim them I s pray their the proceedings imputed the the
 may have , access , any freedom to servant through , the , from their am enable most and be me Country all receive not time Excellency that ' proceedings discharge their their I duty seasonable error person privileges . , rights , pray their better claim who to of , into that Queen undoubted imputed at in all construction times performance the and speech fault in Commons favourable to humbly the that they me Your , to , should I debates and If and Excellency the , at , the especially fall and whose may to their s may those to duties of Your , I them
 their construction and favourable discharge not any who , and have should claim me through duties proceedings in , to error their that the them time Excellency whose seasonable that and privileges of , duty enable of . , they , from undoubted performance , their most Excellency be humbly I receive all those pray the If I am Your , , especially fall access Your and , their may Queen to Country their to at all , may the into s to Commons ' times at the freedom that , better , may to the to I fault servant person me speech and imputed debates rights in
 of privileges imputed at s any Country discharge am through their fall all and , , error better If to duties and me them those , especially duty Queen performance time their favourable enable that I , and freedom fault to their seasonable the servant of their times . in and receive I they from construction , the humbly not debates Excellency may , be to ' Commons , , at that I the to Your the Your all speech to should me undoubted into rights may , pray access their Excellency to most proceedings and have , that in who claim , may the whose person ,
 . should Queen privileges their Your that person Excellency the rights whose duty construction access time most from undoubted who and better at pray s may , at , I I that , , to their debates to duties to them that and , may , the receive their If me seasonable imputed and enable those the in proceedings favourable times especially be Your all , , I , and performance servant fault error the to the their ' Commons freedom not of all may to Excellency claim and me their humbly any they of have , fall Country discharge speech am in through to , into ,
 their at better me of all duties favourable and discharge Country proceedings be in construction . the time should the enable fault , Queen those times , their error person am through seasonable all , and may , the their , receive their Your fall to claim Commons s may that , speech to rights privileges , duty any from freedom servant they to debates undoubted to of at them , in I that performance to Your not to Excellency Excellency have their humbly I , the may imputed pray whose If , and especially I access the and and me , that ' , into who most
Senator Tkachuk :
If we elect the Liberals, inflation will be high? 
We already know that! 
Let me continue in that vein. 
Perhaps honourable senators opposite do not want to hear what Paul Martin will be doing, and the explaining that you will have to do back home in 10 or 15 years when your children ask you what you did about this bill. 
When they retire, their CPP benefits will be worth about what they put in, plus 2.5 per cent.  
I do not get it. 
I do not understand why we are being asked to do that to our children, so that those who are retiring today can receive full benefits and those who are retiring soon can get their benefits. 
I do not get it. 
I will try to explain it today, and - I hope I can convince you.  
The CPP is part of a larger program that Paul Martin is introducing. 
Everything involves reform. 
We will have a reform of the Old Age Security benefit, which is coming up after Christmas. 
It is important to get through this before Christmas so that we can consider changes in the cut-backs that will come due after Christmas. 
We on this side think that both matters should be discussed together because it is part of a pension program and a part of a social security net for people in this country who retire at 65 and who want to retire with some dignity.  
We strongly believe that this measure is a payroll tax and a job killer. 
Yesterday, Senator Kirby said it was not a payroll tax. 
The Department of Finance did a study in April 1995 which was reported in The Toronto Star . 
The study noted that the relatively modest increase of CPP premiums between 1986 and 1993 resulted in 26,000 fewer jobs. 
It further noted that the increases have had and will continue to have a negative impact on the labour force. 
 If , in the performance of those duties , I should at any time fall into error , I pray that the fault may be imputed to me , and not to the Commons , whose servant I am , and who , through me , the better to enable them to discharge their duty to their Queen and Country , humbly claim all their undoubted rights and privileges , especially that they may have freedom of speech in their debates , access to Your Excellency s person at all seasonable times , and that their proceedings may receive from Your Excellency the most favourable construction .
 the privileges that me in , performance those enable should humbly , discharge their from Commons to am may in If of imputed , the duties and that proceedings most and freedom the to may better their speech debates Queen , have seasonable Your ' servant receive favourable their person claim , who . any be , , through me their especially , , whose construction fall , , not pray time all undoubted at to error to rights fault all they the times Excellency I and at into and I Excellency to access Country their Your them , duty may the of s and to that
 , performance their claim favourable fault all me freedom undoubted I into to through to of construction time that me them and in , enable to Your , not at Queen debates speech am seasonable , , their the imputed ' I to servant Your Excellency person those the that , , better discharge and and , at the , duties and Commons from humbly the of most any pray Country may have receive rights be fall s , proceedings and should the If their times duty to error , they access in their that their , privileges especially I all may . may who whose to
 favourable Commons and If humbly to , most into freedom and , they I through Excellency the the have of ' performance better times , , may , , fault of their any should that enable Your imputed their proceedings me especially them duty at , , to debates rights may claim s Queen I be duties the seasonable , all time pray their from privileges to speech discharge who error to fall Country , servant I me to whose that and those Your access undoubted , and to at person their all not . Excellency their construction , the may the in and receive am that
The Hon. the Speaker of the Senate answered: 
 The . : Speaker the Hon Senate the answered of
 The the . : of the Senate Hon Speaker answered
 the Senate : The Speaker of answered the . Hon
 of . the answered Senate the Hon The Speaker :
 Hon Senate the The answered . Speaker of : the
 . the of : Hon the The Speaker answered Senate
 : The answered the . Hon the Speaker of Senate
 : answered Hon the The the . of Senate Speaker
 answered the Senate Speaker The of Hon : . the
 answered the Hon of . The : Senate Speaker the
 the Hon the answered Speaker . Senate of The :
 the Hon . Speaker the : The of answered Senate
 : answered The of Senate Hon Speaker the . the
 . of Senate answered the Hon : Speaker The the
 . : the Hon Speaker Senate answered The the of
 : Speaker the The answered the Hon . of Senate
The whole purpose of starting the session at 1:30 p.m. has been defeated.  
I do not think it is correct, unless there is an urgency, for committees to sit at the same time as the chamber. 
This is not for appearances' sake, but because the work done here can often be as important in the debates as what goes on in committees. 
At various stages of our work - the introduction of bills, second reading, committee referral, then third reading - we are often doing several at the same time. 
Sometimes even two, three or four committees are sitting when we are sitting. 
That is an improper practice.  
If the deputy leader could guarantee to us that, on Wednesdays from now on - and we will strive to be cooperative - we will sit no later than 3:30 p.m., unless there is a proven urgency, then I think Senator Stewart's motion is in order. 
However, we need that assurance first.  
Senator Carstairs :
Let me assure the Leader and Deputy Leader of the Opposition that we will do everything on our part to ensure that sessions end on time. 
We did sit yesterday, which was a Monday. 
I can assure senators we will be sitting next Monday in order to fulfil the business of the chamber before the Christmas break.  
Senator Kinsella :
On that basis, I do not think leave is necessary.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is leave granted?  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
He just felt it was not necessary.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Leave is granted.  
 The Hon . Speaker of the Senate answered :
 of the answered : Hon The Speaker . the
 Speaker . The the : of the Senate answered
 Hon . The of : answered Senate the the
Mr. Speaker, 
 Speaker . Mr ,
 . Mr , Speaker
 Speaker , Mr .
 . Mr Speaker ,
 . Mr Speaker ,
 Mr Speaker , .
 Mr . Speaker ,
 Mr , . Speaker
 Speaker . Mr ,
 Speaker Mr , .
 Speaker . , Mr
 , Mr Speaker .
 Mr Speaker , .
 Speaker Mr . ,
 . Speaker Mr ,
 Speaker , Mr .
Response to Newspaper Article on Senator's Residency Qualifications 
Hon. Colin Kenny :
Honourable senators, I rise today on behalf of a colleague who cannot be present, Senator Paul Lucier. 
Senator Lucier has sent me a fax which he has asked me to communicate to the chamber. 
For your benefit, he wants me to reply to the comments made about him in the media recently.  
He writes: 
I would like to make some points with respect to this matter: 
The Citizen said: "Paul Lucier said the Senate's legal staff approved his change in residency five years ago when he moved to Vancouver."  
Senator Lucier says: 
This is not true. 
I never spoke with legal staff five years ago about this. 
I never had any problem about residency.  
2. The Citizen said: "He said Senate staff told him he could keep his seat as long as he continues to own property in the Yukon."  
Senator Lucier replies: 
Again, I never spoke to the staff and was therefore never told any such comment. 
On my attendance, 21 % (19 out of 87 sittings), and on the statement: "He says - 
Senator Lucier has underlined the word "says."  
- he has bone cancer and must live in the British Columbia city for treatments".  
Senator Lucier replies: 
I wonder if Jack Aubry is questioning the fact that I have cancer. 
 Mr . Speaker
 . , Speaker
 Speaker . ,
 , Mr Speaker
I am commanded by His Excellency the Governor General to declare to you that he freely confides in the duty and attachment of the House of Commons to Her Majesty's Person and Government, and not doubting that their proceedings will be conducted with wisdom, temper and prudence, he grants, and upon all occasions will recognize and allow, their constitutional privileges. 
 be that not of , and s Governor and , confides will to you the commanded ' prudence upon wisdom privileges , Commons temper freely constitutional that their attachment and by conducted he Person House occasions declare with grants , Government the and , allow will General doubting in proceedings . and to of their I and recognize Majesty Her duty he Excellency to am all the His
 commanded will by of Government constitutional confides their their , I General conducted be and am ' that Person His and Excellency and wisdom , freely duty of , occasions s Her temper he prudence and the in to the House , he , to doubting all will you recognize grants Majesty . and and attachment upon declare privileges not to proceedings with that Commons Governor the allow
 upon their confides all in with and doubting that Person and Majesty allow am ' His commanded constitutional to you Excellency recognize their House of prudence General , be Commons the Governor attachment , and , , occasions he and the declare he will and temper privileges of , to duty grants freely . to the proceedings and Government that wisdom conducted Her s by I will not
 am prudence upon , wisdom in confides allow , to by occasions and and , not ' all , with Person declare Her the to the to doubting , and the s . Commons recognize their their attachment he conducted Majesty that and that of freely of and be His I privileges constitutional he will General you House Governor commanded grants will and proceedings Government Excellency temper duty
 proceedings and His . s of he Majesty the freely recognize commanded , allow and General be confides , , by all I will you occasions to Commons to will Excellency the that not Government temper duty , doubting , prudence ' and attachment with and Her declare Person of their their and upon the conducted wisdom privileges he grants am constitutional to in that and Governor House
 and , that occasions he attachment of House their be duty constitutional proceedings s prudence ' temper of allow not privileges I the in Excellency the recognize and . General by Person wisdom Commons with will , freely Government and will to confides declare the Majesty and , , commanded grants you their Governor His that am and conducted to , to upon doubting he Her and all
 temper and will their , Government , Governor attachment , the Majesty in commanded by proceedings ' occasions of and General wisdom Excellency , the upon s to that you their and grants with Her will conducted not be His duty all of and and to am to he Person prudence Commons . and confides declare the allow recognize House constitutional , that doubting freely privileges I he
 occasions their and conducted declare Majesty of not Excellency House doubting will I grants , to allow Government you Commons that confides attachment recognize freely with privileges duty prudence . wisdom the Governor and will all and , to the ' he and of the s Her am temper he upon that commanded constitutional proceedings and to be His Person and by General , in , , their
 will House . constitutional he doubting wisdom confides recognize upon and Her to of prudence , grants that , Governor temper the and Commons their Government Excellency to their I conducted proceedings of duty Majesty occasions allow be Person am the he to His in by privileges and General the and , attachment freely , not all s commanded will and you ' and , that declare with
 of privileges will the all General ' prudence declare His , to with the the of conducted upon grants , Excellency . not to Majesty , and doubting Government Her temper that their am commanded duty recognize their I in Governor House constitutional Commons and and confides he and and you occasions allow that wisdom by , and proceedings freely s , Person to he be will attachment
 conducted His be and and freely to declare s grants not to ' duty the Majesty attachment Governor privileges that , , allow the recognize Person of General occasions and , you Her that and he he in wisdom , with Government proceedings commanded temper to , am and constitutional all House and . I the will Excellency their their of Commons upon doubting prudence by confides will
 recognize Person . I occasions privileges you s prudence to confides will will the all Her , attachment Governor and commanded upon , with to His their Majesty , wisdom duty Commons , of proceedings and he grants and House their Excellency conducted in that ' and doubting am General by and freely that be constitutional not the to and declare the of he Government temper , allow
 be conducted of you Governor and with , privileges grants and recognize their Excellency he duty . commanded , s proceedings and confides Commons am that allow doubting and all that declare occasions House the , Government Person to by he and prudence ' of to , Her will Majesty to will freely His not and wisdom constitutional in attachment upon the the temper their , General I
 , constitutional proceedings Commons that their to confides . s by am and and of be House he all wisdom doubting , declare not privileges he the Majesty and recognize , that in freely duty Governor occasions and upon , to and the His Excellency you , to commanded ' I prudence attachment General Her their the with Government will temper Person allow of grants conducted will and
 House Majesty Excellency grants prudence conducted and occasions to constitutional he that wisdom of Commons allow His to Governor Her am Government and s to that not the in . recognize you , , confides attachment and all proceedings with declare of commanded ' , , their by and the duty will freely will their upon the he I and privileges and Person , General temper be doubting
 not duty , and Her I declare . privileges by to and upon their Person to recognize and prudence Commons will and with the proceedings to that House the His all Governor and the ' of Government freely grants General occasions commanded be conducted , , Excellency s Majesty wisdom you will of , he constitutional in and that confides attachment doubting allow , their he temper am
Legislation was enacted for spousal credits. 
When people get divorced, they have to keep up with the times. 
They can split the benefits. 
That was not done before. 
At the inception of this program, that was not allowed.  
Because men die earlier and women live longer, the money went mostly to women. 
It costs more money. 
I am not saying that is bad. 
I am just saying that all of a sudden it costs more money because women are either lucky or live better or cleaner lives than men, and they live longer.  
Senator Gigantès :
They survive us. 
It takes strength and intelligence.  
Senator Moore :
Meaning we are not intelligent?  
Senator Gigantès :
Not as much as the women are.  
Senator Tkachuk :
Then the benefits were extended. 
The provision went from having to live together for seven years to share in CPP benefits - in other words, when one died the other one would pick up the cash - down to one year. 
If you lived together for one year, the other person was considered your husband or your wife, and benefits again were extended to the surviving spouse - another increased cost.  
 I am commanded by His Excellency the Governor General to declare to you that freely confides in the duty and attachment of the House of Commons to Her Majesty ' s Person and Government , and not doubting that their proceedings will be conducted with wisdom , temper and prudence , he grants , and upon all occasions will recognize and allow , their constitutional privileges .
 , all their House wisdom recognize to of ' and Her s His by . in and to Person their to upon Governor the declare commanded proceedings grants temper confides with , , not will will be freely and he Majesty prudence General attachment of , doubting constitutional Excellency conducted that Government duty and privileges you he and allow the that Commons and am occasions , the
 and Commons grants and not the of . Her , temper and with , House declare that prudence of you attachment their proceedings wisdom allow by , he he Majesty constitutional the their , recognize and to and Government commanded the confides will Governor General in I all His and to Person be will privileges that to , conducted upon s doubting Excellency freely duty occasions am
 and their constitutional of House ' the occasions with wisdom you and by not , be privileges the . General he grants Person Majesty their allow commanded His Her will conducted in , to to am Excellency doubting confides declare Governor to that s proceedings that I freely attachment temper all will and , and duty he and , Commons the of recognize prudence and , upon
I am commanded also to assure you that the Commons shall have ready access to His Excellency upon all seasonable occasions and that their proceedings, as well as your words and actions, will constantly receive from him the most favourable construction.  
 am His occasions most , Commons him have receive all that and seasonable the from proceedings shall well Excellency assure construction actions words to your their . as to I the that as access upon will constantly and commanded favourable , you ready also
 their as I occasions the receive seasonable upon am to and actions commanded all Excellency your will most have ready , also , favourable words assure from construction well as proceedings that him that access . you shall constantly and the Commons to His
 proceedings all that and have , your ready as construction him the most will constantly occasions commanded I favourable upon well , seasonable am His to Commons their and the access assure receive actions that . to as shall words Excellency you also from
 the well will as , that favourable seasonable as am shall Commons , you proceedings also that assure the commanded His all construction occasions and their him upon most to and Excellency have actions constantly words to your receive I . ready access from
 . to to as seasonable construction that from all as access am words their most that commanded occasions actions ready him the Excellency shall your well constantly the you , assure and , and have will Commons receive favourable upon I also proceedings His
 and will words commanded occasions as access all to to their am I , well ready your assure and seasonable proceedings , receive the actions the upon favourable also Commons from shall construction constantly . most have you as him that that His Excellency
 favourable most construction seasonable occasions from also as will am the commanded proceedings and shall . have Commons the upon constantly as Excellency , all access receive their words that well , actions and I to you him assure that to ready His your
 the and as occasions favourable words also your proceedings seasonable shall you His have Excellency that construction most , all and well will commanded to as constantly I to Commons upon , from actions am . him the ready receive that assure their access
 Excellency as occasions Commons all assure I proceedings favourable , receive and to ready and words the as am that most access you your shall the to that have commanded construction also will him seasonable from constantly His actions their , well upon .
 construction as , His will to constantly upon you the all most favourable him shall am access your ready Commons commanded their Excellency occasions the well to actions and proceedings I . also have that , words seasonable that as receive assure and from
 him occasions construction His that shall the ready Commons access , upon as , as I to assure the your commanded am constantly proceedings their most from also to Excellency receive all favourable words and have actions seasonable and well . will you that
 , and receive most occasions the all proceedings the assure him . constantly seasonable as Excellency His shall I that , access from you commanded their words also construction Commons to will as actions and ready favourable your have am upon well that to
 upon shall as most the access your commanded all Excellency . constantly ready occasions actions to assure to construction His as you proceedings and receive favourable seasonable words the I will , well that their that have also from , him am Commons and
 and all that His I , am you constantly the most your also as him Commons have upon to to access construction their shall occasions seasonable ready proceedings receive . Excellency well the words , and actions commanded will favourable assure that as from
 and , the from Excellency , will have as construction am to favourable well you proceedings access all him ready most your assure Commons seasonable their the constantly . and words occasions also actions receive that that commanded I His to upon as shall
 as shall upon most constantly and favourable , ready that that have will actions their seasonable as the Excellency to I His well him am words from the construction . proceedings assure your to commanded , Commons all occasions also you and access receive
First, he has transferred much of the tax burden to the provinces, forcing what I call "downloaded increased taxes." 
Provincial and municipal governments, who were receiving less money, had to increase taxes. 
The government transferred debt.  
Second, this government has taken advantage of the low interest rates which resulted from the efforts of the Conservative government over eight years to bring the deficit and inflation under control and to bring interest rates down.  
Third, Paul Martin then not only raised licence fees and taxes, he used the accumulated surplus in the EI fund to pay down the deficit. 
It is this third policy theme with which we, on this side, feel most uncomfortable. 
He used the surplus in the EI fund, not to extend benefits, not to reduce premiums - which is normally what is done in a payroll deduction - but to cut benefits for a totally separate policy objective. 
He used this payroll tax purely and simply, to achieve his policy goal of cutting the deficit.  
That is why the Auditor General is prohibited from examining the fund unless the directors of the fund agree. 
It should not be for the directors to agree or disagree. 
Parliament must insist that the Auditor General report to us on the fund and on its administration. 
However, the Auditor General will report to the directors of the fund on how they manage their affairs. 
That is not acceptable.  
We are talking of $100 billion by the year 2006, and rapid increases thereafter. 
On this record, it will fail.  
It is an anomaly of governments to charge taxes for employment insurance premiums, and then reduce services to accumulate a surplus to pay down a deficit. 
It then writes cheques for something else. 
The government charges taxes for transportation then imposes user fees at airports and tolls on highways for the right to use the airports and highways that we have paid taxes to build and maintain. 
It imposes taxes to create historical sites and national parks and then charge people to get in. 
It charges premiums for pensions but, by the way, cannot pay those pensions, so the government has to charge us more.  
 I am commanded also to assure you that the Commons shall have ready access to His Excellency upon all seasonable occasions and that their proceedings , as well as your words and actions will constantly receive from him the most favourable construction .
 will access your to His assure occasions words all upon I the you seasonable as ready most am proceedings favourable that from actions as also constantly , to receive shall the have construction Commons . Excellency well and commanded , that and him
 construction from will that , access him as His most upon seasonable the as favourable also well the proceedings I actions receive am . to you shall Commons their words assure , and all have Excellency occasions to and your ready that commanded
 from favourable proceedings actions I him well Excellency will His shall seasonable to have construction commanded the ready and to that as your their assure as you . all and , receive also constantly , upon the most am access occasions words that
Speech from the Throne 
 the Speech Throne from
 from Speech the Throne
 Throne the Speech from
 the Speech Throne from
 from Speech Throne the
 from Speech Throne the
 from Speech Throne the
 Throne Speech from the
 Speech Throne from the
 the Speech from Throne
 Speech the from Throne
 the Throne Speech from
 Throne the from Speech
 Throne the Speech from
 the from Speech Throne
 from Speech Throne the
Whereas the Government of Quebec has indicated that it intends to establish French and English linguistic school boards in Quebec; 
and whereas the National Assembly of Quebec has passed a resolution authorizing an amendment to the Constitution of Canada; 
and whereas the National Assembly of Quebec has reaffirmed the established rights of the English-speaking community of Quebec, specifically the right, in accordance with the law of Quebec, of members of that community to have their children receive their instruction in English language educational facilities that are under the management and control of that community and are financed through public funds; 
and whereas section 23 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms guarantees to citizens throughout Canada rights to minority language instruction and minority language educational facilities under the management and control of linguistic minorities and provided out of public funds; 
and whereas section 43 of the Constitution Act, 1982 provides that an amendment to the Constitution of Canada may be made by proclamation issued by the Governor General under the Great Seal of Canada where so authorized by resolutions of the Senate and House of Commons and of the legislative assembly of each province to which the amendment applies; 
now therefore the Senate resolves that an amendment to the Constitution of Canada be authorized to be made by proclamation issued by His Excellency the Governor General under the Great Seal of Canada in accordance with the schedule hereto.  
SCHEDULE 
AMENDMENT TO THE CONSTITUTION OF CANADA 
CONSTITUTION ACT, 1867 
The Constitution Act, 1867, is amended by adding, immediately after section 93, the following: 
"93A. 
Paragraphs (1) to (4) of section 93 do not apply to Quebec." 
CITATION 
2. This Amendment may be cited as the Constitution Amendment (year of proclamation) (Quebec).  
The special joint committee on which I have the honour to sit was given the mandate of studying the proposed amendment to section 93. 
Today, we have before us the resolution to amend section 93 of the Constitution Act, 1867.  
Briefly put, I support this resolution. 
I am also convinced that the majority of Catholic parents in Quebec who enjoy the guarantees provided under section 93 support this amendment, as do the majority of Protestant parents, who are in the same situation.  
However, the Quebec National Assembly will no longer be subject to legislation predating Confederation with respect to denominational instruction.  
These laws of Quebec that predate Confederation and concern Catholic and Protestant denominational schools have led to the creation of an unusual system, which gave Catholic and Protestant parents different rights, according to where they lived in the province.  
 Speech from the
 Speech from Throne
 Throne Speech from
 the Throne Speech
His Excellency the Governor General was then pleased to open the First Session of the Thirty-sixth Parliament with the following speech: 
 was following the then General of : to with the His First Session open - Governor the Parliament Excellency Thirty the sixth pleased speech
 with open to Parliament : - then of Session the the pleased His following First was the sixth speech Excellency Governor Thirty General the
 the was with of : then the the - Thirty open Parliament speech Session His Governor pleased First following General to sixth the Excellency
 sixth speech His Governor open the the - Excellency Session with following the was First Parliament then : of General pleased Thirty the to
 the of : Excellency Governor was General the Session pleased sixth - the to Parliament Thirty the His with open then First speech following
 sixth First with was Excellency Thirty the Session following of Parliament to - Governor : speech open the General then His the the pleased
 of to Session open pleased - the Excellency then sixth His was Parliament the the Thirty with following First General : Governor speech the
 with speech Parliament sixth Session pleased General Governor then the to Thirty following of His the was the Excellency First - : the open
 Thirty speech open : Session of the Parliament Excellency to then First the His the General Governor following - the pleased with was sixth
 pleased with General of following : was sixth open the speech His Governor First Parliament then Session Excellency the - the the Thirty to
 to Governor : pleased His open following the the Thirty sixth speech Parliament the was Excellency First of Session General with the - then
 Session First following Parliament open : then Excellency General Thirty the pleased speech His the Governor was the sixth of to with the -
 sixth Governor Parliament the Excellency speech the the Session - Thirty open His First following : pleased to General of then was with the
 Session of the the Excellency following First the was Governor : the with open Thirty His to - Parliament then speech General sixth pleased
 Excellency following His of the the - First sixth Session Governor speech Thirty the open pleased the was : Parliament General then to with
 Excellency Governor First with the the of pleased following : to the - Session General Thirty sixth was Parliament open the His speech then
Quebec 
Linguistic School Boards-Amendment to Section 93 of Constitution-Report of Special Joint Committee Adopted 
On the Order: 
Resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Pépin, seconded by the Honourable Senator Lucier, for the adoption of the Report of the Special Joint Committee to Amend Section 93 of the Constitution Act, 1867 concerning the Quebec School System, deposited with the Clerk of the Senate on November 7, 1997.  
Hon. John Lynch-Staunton (Leader of the Opposition) :
Honourable senators, I would like first of all to thank the co-chairmen of the joint committee, our colleague Senator Lucie Pépin, and the other co-chairman, MP Denis Paradis, for their excellent work in rather exceptional and sometimes trying circumstances.  
In fact, as has been said here and elsewhere, considering the decision of the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs that government support for the amendment to section 93 of the Constitution was already an established fact and that the government majority in committee left no doubt as to what conclusions it would reach, the committee's role could have been limited to that of a rubber stamp.  
Furthermore, the committee was not allowed to hold hearings outside Ottawa and was required to table its report no later than November 7, 1997, with only three weeks to hear witnesses and prepare its report. 
What a contrast with the extremely slow process followed by many less important bills that gather dust for months on parliamentary shelves before receiving Royal Assent.  
In his November 27, 1997 speech, Senator Wood gave a very good description of the strait-jacket in which the joint committee had to work. 
Everything was rushed. 
No announcements were made that hearings were being held, contrary to what is usually done. 
The list of witnesses changed almost from hour to hour. 
Some witnesses had only a few hours' notice that they would be appearing before the committee, and their presentations suffered as a result, as they said themselves.  
Under such conditions, it was quite normal that participation in the committee could have been interpreted as sanctioning the conditions imposed by and for the government. 
However, this was an issue that was worth risking this false interpretation, because the Parliament of Canada is dealing with a request from the Quebec National Assembly, with its sovereignist majority, to exempt Quebec from certain constitutional obligations it has had to live with for 130 years.  
Unfortunately, there was not enough time to involve the committee in preparatory briefings in order for it to have as complete an appreciation and understanding as possible of all the implications of Quebec's resolution. 
As a result, it tended to stray from the substance of the reference before it. 
"Religious education," "religious instruction," "denominational schools," "confessional schools," "linguistic rights," "minority rights" and other terms were used so often that they tended to become interchangeable to the point that they occasionally melded together.  
Section 93 was a result of a compromise at a time when two religious beliefs dominated everyday life in Canada to an extent hard to describe today when even one's most difficult moral decisions are usually self-determined, rather than imposed without question by a recognized higher authority. 
 His Excellency the Governor General was then pleased to open the First Session of the Thirty - Parliament with the following speech :
 the Thirty Parliament First sixth - was to the following the with : His pleased then the General Governor of speech Excellency Session
 Excellency Parliament - was sixth speech following Thirty the First pleased to His Governor : the open the with of the Session then
 following pleased the open to : sixth - then Parliament Governor Thirty First Session Excellency the General with the the His was of
Honourable Members of the Senate, 
 Honourable Senate of Members the ,
 , Honourable the Members of Senate
 Honourable the of , Senate Members
 Senate , of Members the Honourable
 of Members the Honourable , Senate
 the of Members Honourable , Senate
 the Senate Members Honourable , of
 the Honourable Members of Senate ,
 of , Senate Members Honourable the
 of Senate the , Members Honourable
 Members of Honourable Senate the ,
 of Members Honourable the Senate ,
 Senate , Honourable of the Members
 Members Honourable , the Senate of
 of Honourable Senate Members the ,
 Members the Senate of Honourable ,
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
The federal government cut its own spending earlier, more drastically and in greater measure than transfers to the provinces. 
The government has made it clear that it will use increased fiscal flexibility to make strategic investments in priority areas, and action was taken early and directly on that commitment based on favourable fiscal results that emerged this past spring.  
With respect to individual provinces, I do not have those numbers. 
However, I would be happy to provide them for my honourable friend.  
Senator Roberge :
Could the minister find out at the same time why, in the same time period, Ontario's share of the cash transfers will increase to $173 million?  
Senator Graham :
Yes. 
While I am doing that, I should like to remind the honourable senator that even before the federal government balances the books, it is putting more money into transfers to the provinces. 
In fact, the government is raising the cash floor from $11 billion to $12.5 billion, the single largest reinvestment made by the federal government. 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Provinces-Effect on Atlantic Provinces 
Hon. Mabel M. DeWare :
Honourable senators, my figures show that, four years ago, the provinces received more than $19 billion in cash transfers for health, education and welfare through what was then known as the Canadian Assistance Program and Established Programs Financing. 
The government's math provides some good news, as the original plan was to give them even less.  
The problem is that some provinces will get less under the new scheme while others will get more. 
Indeed, seven of the ten provinces will actually see their cash transfers fall even further, including all of Atlantic Canada.  
The cash transfer to Nova Scotia will fall from $427 million to $411 million, which is a difference of $16 million. 
The transfer for Prince Edward Island will fall from $60 million to $59 million, which is a reduction of $1 million. 
The cash transfer to Newfoundland will fall from $281 million to $251 million, which is a difference of $30 million. 
 Honourable of the Senate ,
 Senate Honourable of Members ,
 of , the Honourable Members
 Members , the of Senate
Members of the House of Commons: 
 of of House : Commons the Members
 the of : of Commons House Members
 of the House Commons of Members :
 : Commons the House of of Members
 of Members the of House Commons :
 of the of House Commons Members :
 the : of of Members Commons House
 : the Commons House of Members of
 Members the Commons House of : of
 the Commons of of House : Members
 : Members the of of Commons House
 : of Members the House Commons of
 of Commons House Members of : the
 the Members of : Commons of House
 House Commons the of Members of :
 : House Commons the of of Members
That is how a deputy minister of finance came to be the president of the Caisse de dépôt et placement du Québec at a time when Finance Minister Parizeau was a very influential member of the Lévesque cabinet. 
This led Quebec industry leaders and other stakeholders to raise all sorts of questions about the policy and management of the Caisse under his direction.  
You know the arbitrary risks inherent in choosing the companies in which the board can invest. 
Of course, there are provisions to limit the ratio, but everyone knows that the percentage of shares required today to control a company is relatively small. 
Can you imagine what kind of arm-twisting this will lead to? 
To collectivize an operation is to politicize it. 
That is what we are doing here, notwithstanding the precaution taken to maintain the board members' independence from the government. 
Even if we are told that they will come from outside the government and operate at arm's length from the government, we must be realistic.  
I would now like to address an important aspect of the bill, namely the impact of the plan on the two pillars of income security mentioned by Senator Kirby. 
The 25 or 30 per cent amounting to $22 billion a year goes to old age pensions. 
Every year, we save $80 billion, or 10 per cent of the gross national product, which goes to income security, including $22 billion from old age pensions, $23 billion from the Canada pension fund and $30 billion or $35 billion from private pension plans. 
Savings coming from private pension plans should remain stable in the future or else get smaller depending on the decisions we make. 
Contributions will increase by 70 per cent within five to seven years. 
I think the amounts will remain stable, but they could also drop, if this increase is not compensated by an equivalent decrease in income tax, for instance.  
As for RRSPs, they are likely to diminish if employment insurance contributions and taxes are not lowered.  
In my opinion, we will likely see a reduction in private savings, along with an increase in public savings. 
Is it a good thing to increase the role of the state? 
This is what is being done here. 
It implies that if it is in the public domain, the money will be better invested than if individuals invest their savings in the private sector. 
Who can possibly think that it makes sense?  
 Members of the of Commons :
 of : Members House of Commons
 the : of Members Commons House
 of : Members the House Commons
My wife, Diana, and I were happy to welcomeHer Majesty the Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh when they arrived in Canada last June and to be their hosts during their stay in the National Capital over Canada Day.  
 Diana Canada of be My Majesty were welcomeHer , during to stay and in they the June Day Canada happy to hosts Edinburgh over National , Capital . I and last in Duke wife when their their the and Queen arrived the
 Diana My Majesty the Canada the were their when welcomeHer last hosts of and Queen over their . in be Edinburgh to during and and happy in they Day stay Capital I National Duke Canada , , arrived the to June wife
 . Day the their to Majesty Queen in of Capital stay the , Diana during arrived , Duke to welcomeHer the June wife Edinburgh when were in and Canada over National hosts My happy their and last and I be they Canada
 last were , , hosts Canada Queen the Duke and and in their Canada in arrived National they happy Day and . over June the their stay I My Edinburgh wife Diana Capital when welcomeHer be to the to Majesty during of
 National last to Queen in when Canada and wife over happy June were to the welcomeHer and arrived be the I Edinburgh hosts and during Capital . Diana My their their , Duke of , they Majesty Day Canada stay the in
 Duke . last Majesty be hosts National Canada wife I , Diana June in happy arrived Edinburgh and the to welcomeHer Capital were Day in the they Queen during when and the My , their and over their Canada to of stay
 , when I last in Majesty over welcomeHer their Canada in Edinburgh the Day National and stay . the , were they Queen their hosts June to during arrived happy Duke and to Diana wife the be and Canada of Capital My
 to , their My Diana Day Edinburgh and when in June wife I the arrived and in they Majesty their over Capital . Canada , during welcomeHer Queen last the of stay and were happy National Canada to be Duke the hosts
 of over the I were their Diana . welcomeHer be June to in happy , the Canada and Majesty their stay Day and Canada , National hosts Edinburgh in to they last wife Queen the and Capital Duke during when arrived My
 welcomeHer Queen hosts when June Majesty , Day I My over stay last the Capital the they their Canada and during Diana their to of National Edinburgh happy , . Canada and the be to wife in arrived and Duke were in
 last wife Canada National over Edinburgh Duke Canada were , stay Capital to , Day during of in the happy . the arrived in My and their be Diana hosts welcomeHer I the Majesty and to when and June they their Queen
 , Canada June Queen Day their were in . they Majesty Canada when hosts wife happy arrived I last during stay in to to , the and Edinburgh the and Capital and Diana the welcomeHer be over My their of Duke National
 in their over when Canada Edinburgh I National the Day Majesty wife be and , Capital welcomeHer were their the last happy Canada Queen and they hosts Diana in Duke to to June My and the during , stay . arrived of
 the to Edinburgh , when Majesty to , in Canada they wife Duke hosts National Capital happy over My in Diana be of I and were and Day the Queen stay and Canada welcomeHer arrived June their . last during their the
 over hosts when their to Queen My National and last Edinburgh their , wife Diana and . arrived be happy Canada Duke I they of June in to were the in , welcomeHer and Capital during Canada stay Majesty the Day the
 they Capital the happy in My be and Queen when , Canada to I the during last . over Canada their National to wife welcomeHer of and Duke in were Day hosts stay the and arrived June Edinburgh Diana , Majesty their
Senator Grafstein :
Again, honourable senators, this is a question of evidence. 
I refer all senators to the transcript.  
I wish to speak specifically about the fact that we are dealing with elites as opposed to the groups they represent. 
We questioned these representatives during the hearings as to whether their underlying groups agreed with the position they had taken.  
On the Catholic side, we had the position of the archbishops, as limited as it was. 
We had Catholic school boards and Catholic teachers. 
I remember specifically cross-examining Catholic teachers and asking whether they had discussions with students and their parents respecting the changes. 
Their view was that they represented the broad consensus of parents and students as it applied to this amendment. 
All parents wanted a change to renovate the school system, and this was the best modality in which to do that.  
I agree with Senator Lynch-Staunton, Senator Wood and Senator Lavoie-Roux that this is not perfect. 
However, in addition to the evidence, we did refer to opinion polls that seemed to suggest a strong support for reform along these lines.  
Yes, the resolution is imperfect. 
We would like to have done it "our way," as Frank Sinatra used to say, but we must deal with the Province of Quebec in this case. 
We had to bend imperfect tools to see whether they fit our minimum requirements. 
In my view, they did not fit our minimum requirements; they fit our reasonable requirements for constitutional amendment.  
Senator Wood :
Is it not true in the letter from the bishops of Quebec - the letter the honourable senator read - that they were in favour of repealing section 93? 
They questioned linguistic rights and suggested that denominational guarantees established by 107 be maintained. 
There was a caveat there that my honourable friend forgot to read.  
 My wife , Diana , and I were happy to welcomeHer Majesty the Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh when arrived in Canada last June and to be their hosts during their stay in the National Capital over Canada Day .
 National their Diana when I in they Duke to happy Canada to of stay over and Queen be Canada the Edinburgh and last June Day in were the My and Capital , Majesty the , welcomeHer . their during hosts wife
 were welcomeHer Duke last happy in the wife hosts , . Edinburgh to during when Diana and Canada stay over Canada arrived I June National , Day Queen the they and Capital be and their Majesty of to the in My
 arrived the Canada they National , when June happy stay their Duke in hosts and were wife their last Queen of . to during Majesty welcomeHer Edinburgh in and I and be the My the Canada Day , to over Capital
As Governor General I have visited every province and territory, and I wish every Canadian could share that experience. 
 experience Governor Canadian territory and wish I visited General . every province have I every that and As , could share
 province territory visited I could As . every and Governor Canadian wish and experience every General share that have I ,
 , General I and Canadian . territory experience have and I share could Governor wish every visited every province that As
 have , General share province visited As and . could every I territory experience that wish I and every Governor Canadian
 that experience every I Governor and visited territory could General and every I , As have Canadian share wish province .
 every I I General Canadian have territory wish could visited experience province every that and and share . , Governor As
 have Canadian wish experience and could every share province . visited As that General territory Governor , and every I I
 , I territory and province have that could share General Governor I wish and experience . As every Canadian every visited
 General I I . Governor every Canadian have share territory and every As experience could province wish and that visited ,
 I I that and As , experience Canadian and every province Governor share General every . have wish territory could visited
 experience every and have Governor every I As I General wish Canadian visited territory . and that , share could province
 that territory and every every I Governor experience I wish province , . As and could General visited have share Canadian
 that experience I visited I . Canadian territory could share every every Governor , and and wish As General province have
 General have . wish territory share and province experience I visited , every Canadian could As Governor and that I every
 and that General I share experience have As I Governor territory every . , wish province visited Canadian could and every
 Governor territory experience every province visited and General wish I As have Canadian I could every that share . and ,
They limited their breeding. 
From what we know of social behaviour during the 1970s, abstinence was not the order of the day. 
People were, shall I say, "fuddling". 
It was not their fault; it was the fault of scientists. 
The cause, they say, was social behaviour. 
That is what caused the end of this pension plan. 
It is one other social plan gone astray. 
The good old days are gone.  
We have another problem. 
People live longer. 
Again, science has interfered with a social plan. 
Retiring at age 65, dropping dead three to six years later, depending on your gender, was good for governments. 
At its inception in 1965 - payments started on January 1, 1967 - in order to be eligible for CPP benefits, you had to be 68, and 68 was about the same year that the average male died. 
It was the perfect pension plan:
Pay all your lives, and then die just as the first cheque is put into the mail. 
If there was a postal strike, the government had the benefit of both worlds - the pensioner was dead and the cheque was in the mail.  
From the beginning, the CPP was simple, but it was misnamed. 
It was misnamed because it is also a life insurance program. 
However, it is a silly program when it is part of a pension plan.  
Instead of cancelling the benefit, there is an argument made as to whether it should be means tested when cancelled or not. 
 As Governor General I visited every province and territory , and I wish every Canadian could share that experience .
 and territory . have I wish could Governor province , Canadian every General share As that and I visited experience
 every visited Governor every that could have As and I experience . I share General territory province wish , Canadian
 , and visited have wish I could every I share experience Governor . that province territory As General Canadian every
Our cities, towns, and villages reflect the diversity of all those who have come to this country. 
 all reflect . , Our have this the country towns diversity villages come , those and who to of cities
 reflect diversity villages towns those country this who the cities , , and have . to of all Our come
 and those of to , this the diversity Our towns , . come who have country villages all reflect cities
 and villages this of come the diversity cities who , towns reflect those Our . all , country have to
 reflect towns villages all and cities , to the diversity Our who country this . of those have , come
 all diversity the country cities towns Our to , and come reflect . those , of have this villages who
 towns those , this have come to villages of the . , and country who all reflect diversity cities Our
 , diversity country come this who Our the to reflect cities towns of villages and those , all . have
 country diversity this who all and reflect . Our , the , those towns cities of villages have come to
 villages Our towns those . come reflect cities country to all and this have who of the , diversity ,
 villages , reflect diversity country all the have those and Our this to cities come who towns , . of
 , this villages diversity come all . country and those have reflect to cities of towns the , who Our
 Our , reflect . , towns this and cities have villages diversity come to the all of those who country
 , to diversity and all the have , Our villages . cities country come towns of who this reflect those
 reflect , of cities country who , the all those and villages come this . have Our diversity towns to
 Our of country come all and , who . villages the to those , reflect towns have this diversity cities
Senator Tkachuk :
Then the benefits were extended. 
The provision went from having to live together for seven years to share in CPP benefits - in other words, when one died the other one would pick up the cash - down to one year. 
If you lived together for one year, the other person was considered your husband or your wife, and benefits again were extended to the surviving spouse - another increased cost.  
Yesterday, Senator Kirby alluded to the possibility that there may be other social changes in those arrangements. 
I know what that means. 
It is possible that governments may recognize gay marriages, and I think he wanted to let us know that there may be these kinds of changes taking place. 
That is fine, if the government wants to do that. 
Now you have two guys living together; one dies, the other one is picking up some cash. 
That costs more money. 
Well, two guys who live together for one year may not be gay. 
How would you know?  
Senator Gigantès :
You want surveillance cameras?  
Senator Tkachuk :
So there is an opportunity for fraud. 
This is not a pension program. 
Let us make that clear. 
This is a payroll tax to pay Old Age Pensions, disability, life insurance, benefits to survivors, orphans, children, or exemptions for child rearing. 
We did not have that either, and there is nothing wrong with that. 
 cities , towns , and villages reflect the diversity of all those who have come to this country .
 have of , and to this come reflect all . the diversity , cities who country villages those Our
 and towns all , to who those . Our country diversity villages the come , reflect of have cities
 cities country diversity towns . villages this all have to come , and who Our reflect those , the
And yet our communities, whether on the coasts or the prairies, whether in the woodlands or on the northern tundra, show the same friendliness, openness, and generosity.  
 our generosity the , and same or the , friendliness woodlands whether , northern on , prairies And whether on . tundra or yet the the coasts openness , show in communities the
 friendliness openness our woodlands or , in , generosity the show yet tundra whether the on , the prairies northern . And on , communities the whether and , same the coasts or
 on or and the , same on tundra coasts the And generosity prairies communities the woodlands in , the whether , our whether friendliness northern . yet openness , or the show ,
 openness same friendliness and or . the show , , , or the the on the coasts , northern tundra generosity And in woodlands whether the , prairies whether our communities on yet
 same in whether northern or , , friendliness show communities and coasts on or whether generosity woodlands , yet our on the , the the tundra , And the the prairies . openness
 , on coasts woodlands same our , on . northern and the generosity yet the openness , whether , show or the whether the prairies or , communities And friendliness tundra the in
 or the the in on or yet generosity , our woodlands . and northern whether , prairies , And the , on communities whether the coasts friendliness , tundra openness the same show
 prairies the , openness the , friendliness generosity same on or and northern woodlands communities coasts the the . or the in our whether whether tundra , show yet , And on ,
 , woodlands whether show communities coasts yet same openness the or And and , , the or the whether . friendliness on the the on , tundra prairies generosity , in our northern
 or prairies on show same whether communities the northern openness on the . our woodlands , yet the whether , , tundra , in the And the or friendliness , generosity coasts and
 or the woodlands and northern the whether coasts the our show , or on openness on the . generosity And , friendliness prairies same tundra , whether communities yet the , , in
 our whether friendliness . on , prairies And , woodlands in the or openness same whether northern , communities the coasts and show tundra the on , the or yet generosity the ,
 show or , openness the yet on coasts and whether in the And northern our , the , friendliness generosity , the communities . , on whether prairies same tundra or the woodlands
 openness the the the communities , and whether prairies tundra generosity or on yet , northern the coasts , the or in woodlands show , whether . same And on , friendliness our
 generosity and tundra the friendliness the , openness the coasts And yet show the prairies same on communities woodlands , . the in or or northern , our on , whether , whether
 prairies , tundra northern on , friendliness our woodlands coasts whether and yet or openness same or the whether the And . the the , on , , in show the generosity communities
That is a travesty. 
That, to me, is not responsible government whatsoever. 
Can you imagine a prime minister who said that he is a man of the people, a man who is determined to change the way government is done, now ramming through the most dramatic changes to our pension system without informing the Canadian public of just what the government is proposing and allowing input from them?  
Honourable senators, I refer to questions raised in this place over the last several months, questions that relate to the ever-increasing taxes that this government is imposing on the lives of all working Canadians. 
For example, on October 1, Senator Michael Meighen asked the following: 
My question relates to employment insurance premiums. 
Given that, according to best estimates, the account will be at a $16-billion surplus this fiscal year, could the Leader of the Government explain to members here today why his Minister of Finance refuses to consider any reductions of premiums...  
He went on further to state: 
Honourable senators, to bring C.D. Howe's quote up to date, "What's a billion?" 
To say that we should rejoice that the premium was not increased from $2.80 to $3.20 is a little like saying that the Leader of the Government should be happy that I am only going to whack him over the head three times instead of ten.  
It seems to me that employment insurance premiums should not be a primary method of fighting the deficit or the debt....  
Honourable senators, we are building this huge surplus and raising Canada Pension Plan premiums - in other words, it is a double tax on Canadians. 
You argue that the Canada Pension Plan is not a tax, but that is not how our kids see it. 
Our kids see it as a tax, because you are taxing their generation to pay for the retirement of our generation. 
It is a tax no matter what you say, and no matter how you say it.  
On October 23, I asked the following: 
Honourable senators, I rise to ask a follow-up question to the response of the Leader of the Government to Senator Meighen's question of October 1 on employment insurance premiums. 
The honourable leader stated that a cut in the EI premium would cost the government some $4.2 billion in lost revenues. 
I would point out to him that this amount may be overstated by 25 to 50 per cent, because it fails to take into consideration increased revenue through greater employment and investment that would be generated by a reduction in premiums.  
Be that as it may, the honourable leader will no doubt recall that in 1995, the Minister of Finance indicated that when the EI surplus reached $5 billion, we would reduce premiums to the break-even point because the surplus would then be sufficient to deal with a recession equivalent to the recession of 1990.  
 And yet our , whether on the coasts or the prairies , whether in the woodlands or on the northern tundra , show the same friendliness , openness , and generosity .
 , whether or or friendliness tundra , , same the the generosity whether . and coasts our , show in prairies openness the on on woodlands communities the northern the yet And
 show openness or and yet on friendliness whether , or , the , , in tundra , the woodlands communities prairies the same our whether coasts generosity on the And northern .
 or in and the prairies our or friendliness show the . the same the , communities openness , , the woodlands coasts northern whether on whether , , tundra And generosity on
People care for each other in many ways, and they give their time and their support to their community.  
 and give community , their in ways . for care to People each their time and their many they support other
 . time community many People their care they other ways and support for their their in give and to , each
 their many other to each care for and and , People community support they in time their their ways give .
 , they their to many in People time for give their . other support community their and care and ways each
 care support other ways and . each give , they time to community their for and in their People their many
 to their People their each care and time their other give many ways in . they , and community for support
 their their each in they ways and support many their People give care and time . to community other , for
 for in and their to their community time support ways , People each care their . give they other and many
 support in their ways many their . time People and other and for to care give they their community each ,
 care for . other community time give they ways their each many their and in and to support their People ,
 many , support other their to . and and give for in ways community care each they their People their time
 ways in care and their give they each community other People , time their for support their many and . to
 ways they other for care in their time , People and give to and each many their community . support their
 to , time community for and other their support give their each their in they ways many and . care People
 many ways their give time People for their and their to other . care and each they support in community ,
 each other in they many give for their and community . ways care their , time their People support to and
Hon. Mabel M. DeWare :
Honourable senators, my figures show that, four years ago, the provinces received more than $19 billion in cash transfers for health, education and welfare through what was then known as the Canadian Assistance Program and Established Programs Financing. 
The government's math provides some good news, as the original plan was to give them even less.  
The problem is that some provinces will get less under the new scheme while others will get more. 
Indeed, seven of the ten provinces will actually see their cash transfers fall even further, including all of Atlantic Canada.  
The cash transfer to Nova Scotia will fall from $427 million to $411 million, which is a difference of $16 million. 
The transfer for Prince Edward Island will fall from $60 million to $59 million, which is a reduction of $1 million. 
The cash transfer to Newfoundland will fall from $281 million to $251 million, which is a difference of $30 million. 
New Brunswick will lose $11 million. 
The total loss to the Atlantic provinces is $58 million.  
At the same time, three provinces, Ontario, Alberta and British Columbia will see their cash payments actually rise. 
Atlantic Canada's loss is their gain.  
Can the Leader of the Government tell us if his government believes that it is fair to ask the provinces that can least afford it to continue to receive less money year after year by way of support for health, education and social assistance?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
I thank the honourable Senator DeWare for doing the mathematics for me. 
I only wish I had done it myself prior to coming into the Senate today. 
I would be happy to investigate the reasons why those particular numbers appear in the manner in which she has presented them.  
Senator DeWare :
I appreciate that. 
It will not matter that we are less able to raise money than the so-called "have provinces."  
 People for each other in many ways , and they give their time and their support to their community .
 and support their each their and , their for ways give in time . they People to community care other
 give their . care many time People they ways other their in , support to their for community and and
 other in People their community ways many they their and give to for time care support their each . and
When I became Governor General, I stated my intention to honour the generosity of Canadians, especially as demonstrated by volunteers. 
 . became by of , When Governor I especially I my the Canadians to honour intention volunteers generosity stated as General demonstrated ,
 , honour generosity I I Canadians especially intention volunteers my . by demonstrated Governor of , became General as When stated to the
 as When by , honour especially became generosity Canadians of stated General to my I . , intention demonstrated volunteers I the Governor
 honour as , the volunteers . I , Canadians of became to I stated demonstrated especially by When intention Governor generosity General my
 intention . I the , my stated demonstrated General volunteers by to of generosity I When especially Canadians Governor , as became honour
 by I demonstrated my of General stated I When volunteers the , to intention as became , Canadians Governor . especially honour generosity
 of , generosity demonstrated . by volunteers General became as to Governor , especially When honour I the I stated my intention Canadians
 generosity by Governor as the I General I , my of Canadians , stated honour . When especially intention to became demonstrated volunteers
 When I intention volunteers honour especially the by Governor generosity demonstrated General Canadians stated to , as my . , I of became
 When stated Governor I Canadians by volunteers , especially my demonstrated honour General I as to generosity intention of , the became .
 honour General stated especially became , the , Canadians demonstrated . my by to intention I generosity Governor of as When I volunteers
 as , to Governor by , Canadians stated . my I became of intention the especially generosity honour General demonstrated When I volunteers
 especially of I I General Canadians demonstrated honour stated intention . , became Governor volunteers When as , to generosity by the my
 I Canadians When , volunteers stated intention demonstrated I General generosity to as , especially the by . Governor became of my honour
 became honour stated Governor , intention to Canadians my volunteers I especially When General demonstrated , the of by as I . generosity
 , , to especially generosity General I became I by intention Canadians honour demonstrated stated of When my volunteers as the . Governor
I presume that my honourable friend is correct in his assumption, but I will have the matter clarified.  
Senator Comeau :
I might advise the minister that indeed there is a 49-per-cent limit on foreign ownership of licences. 
Unfortunately, almost nothing has been said by the negotiators as to how they will handle these extremely important issues that impact on all the coastal communities of Canada.  
As a supplementary, would the minister also advise whether the government negotiators have been consulting with the fishing industry on this subject? 
If so, what has been the government's position in relation to the fishing industry?  
Senator Graham :
The answer, honourable senators, is that they have been consulting with the fishing industry. 
I believe the position of the industry is exactly as suggested by my honourable friend. 
That is something else that I will have clarified for him.  
National Defence 
Search and Rescue Helicopter Replacement Program-Possible Cabinet Discussion on Awarding Contract for Helicopter Purchase-Government Position 
Hon. J. Michael Forrestall :
Honourable senators, did the cabinet consider the awarding of a contract for new search and rescue helicopters this morning? 
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, my honourable friend would be the first to recognize that it is not appropriate for me to comment on any discussions that took place in cabinet this morning. 
Hon. Lowell Murray :
Would it be appropriate for the honourable minister to let us know whether it was considered last week?  
Senator Graham :
The matter of the helicopters is under active consideration by the government.  
 When I became Governor General , I stated my intention to honour the of Canadians , especially as demonstrated by volunteers .
 When generosity . , became intention demonstrated to honour , by volunteers especially of as Canadians the my General Governor I I
 volunteers . honour by When stated intention , as Governor to especially General generosity I my the demonstrated , of I Canadians
 to When I the General demonstrated stated Governor volunteers of generosity intention became by , , my especially I . as Canadians
We have now created the Caring Canadian Award to recognize the most dedicated among them.  
 dedicated Award created most them recognize the Caring Canadian . among the now to We have
 them created Caring the most now Canadian recognize dedicated among Award We have the to .
 Caring have them Award created recognize We among to the now dedicated Canadian the . most
 Canadian recognize the most . dedicated them to now among have the Award created Caring We
 have Canadian dedicated among them now recognize most to Caring Award the We . created the
 created them recognize We Caring Award most now the . the among Canadian have dedicated to
 them Caring Award dedicated to have Canadian among the We most the recognize created now .
 now among . We recognize Caring to Canadian created most dedicated the have Award the them
 Canadian have now Award dedicated recognize . them among most the created the to Caring We
 recognize them Caring now We among Canadian created dedicated . Award the the to have most
 recognize the created . them We most dedicated Canadian to among Award have Caring the now
 among Award have the . to Caring created We Canadian recognize now the them most dedicated
 Canadian them dedicated have created We Caring recognize the now among most . to the Award
 Award dedicated the We Caring recognize most among to have the created them Canadian . now
 the recognize now most Caring them . dedicated Award the to Canadian have created We among
 recognize them created We most Canadian the Caring have to the dedicated Award now . among
This morning, the Quebec minister of intergovernmental affairs, Mr. Brassard, said, and I quote: 
This is what we have always said.  
Bear in mind that this minister is a separatist. 
I repeat what he said: 
This is what we have always said.  
Mr. Chrétien has acknowledged that the federal government would negotiate. 
Could the Leader of the Government in the Senate tell us under what authority the Prime Minister could negotiate?  
Senator Graham :
The Prime Minister would be negotiating on behalf of Canadians, but recognizing at the same time that nine other provinces and the territories are involved. 
I am sure the Prime Minister would take all of that into consideration.  
Senator Nolin :
The Supreme Court received the request from your government to decide on the issue of Quebec's secession. 
We will learn in all likelihood from the Supreme Court that the amending formula would be appropriate if Canadians agreed to allow one province to separate from the others. 
Have the Prime Minister, the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs or officials of your government had formal or informal discussions on this matter with the representatives of the nine other provinces?  
Senator Graham :
Not that I am aware, honourable senators. 
We are aware, of course, of the meetings that took place with the premiers in Calgary. 
We know there is a first ministers' conference later this week in Ottawa, at which this matter may or may not arise. 
However, I am not aware that there have been discussions, either formal or informal, between the Prime Minister and the premiers up to this point in time.  
Immigration 
 We have now created the Caring Award to recognize the most dedicated among them .
 created most dedicated recognize to have Award We them . Caring among the the now
 the most to now the We have Caring dedicated recognize among Canadian them Award created
 now created to recognize Canadian among Caring the most the Award them have dedicated .
In my functions, I visit with many units of the Canadian Forces. 
 , the . Forces In visit of I functions my with units Canadian many
 visit , In Canadian functions the units . Forces many with I of my
 functions the with , In Forces Canadian units visit my I of many .
 Canadian , units of Forces visit functions my I the . In with many
 with Forces Canadian I . visit units my functions In many the , of
 . many I my of Canadian functions units the with , In visit Forces
 In visit I my with units functions the of Forces many , Canadian .
 , . units visit of my I with functions Canadian Forces In many the
 functions Canadian , Forces units with I the . my visit In many of
 the my Canadian units visit , In with I functions Forces many of .
 with the visit In , units my I functions Forces of . many Canadian
 Forces . my units many visit the Canadian with , I In functions of
 I my In . many the with visit units functions of Canadian , Forces
 with functions units many visit the of Forces In I , . my Canadian
 , units I with my Canadian . of In functions visit Forces the many
 In I many units Canadian , functions my with of Forces the . visit
They do invite witnesses, many of whom come from out of town. 
We inconvenience them if we are not able to hear from them.  
I must congratulate senators on this side who have refrained, for the most part, from making Senators' Statements on Wednesdays, unless it was something quite urgent, as was Senator Kenny's statement today. 
They have tried to make their speeches on either Tuesdays or Thursdays. 
Senators on the other side have attempted to do the same thing. 
With that level of cooperation, perhaps at some time in the future we can invoke a more formal process whereby there will be some guarantee to committee chairs.  
Barring that formal process, Senator Stewart has witnesses to hear from tomorrow, and I should like him to have permission to hear those witnesses tomorrow.  
Hon. John Lynch-Staunton (Leader of the Opposition) :
That worked for a while. 
Now we have forgotten Mondays, but we have continued on with the practice of having early sittings on Wednesdays. 
As a result, Wednesday has become a normal working session, going on until five or six o'clock. 
The whole purpose of starting the session at 1:30 p.m. has been defeated.  
I do not think it is correct, unless there is an urgency, for committees to sit at the same time as the chamber. 
This is not for appearances' sake, but because the work done here can often be as important in the debates as what goes on in committees. 
At various stages of our work - the introduction of bills, second reading, committee referral, then third reading - we are often doing several at the same time. 
Sometimes even two, three or four committees are sitting when we are sitting. 
That is an improper practice.  
If the deputy leader could guarantee to us that, on Wednesdays from now on - and we will strive to be cooperative - we will sit no later than 3:30 p.m., unless there is a proven urgency, then I think Senator Stewart's motion is in order. 
However, we need that assurance first.  
Senator Carstairs :
 my functions , I visit with many units of the Canadian Forces .
 the many In units . Forces functions , Canadian I visit of with
 Canadian functions my Forces of I visit the , . units many In
 units , with Canadian of . the I In my visit Forces many
They have impressed me with their dedication, as demonstrated by their peacekeeping role, their heroic work in search and rescue, and their immediate response to natural disasters such as the Saguenay region and Red River floods.  
 region and rescue by Red They dedication and impressed their in search work . peacekeeping me as to such floods with heroic , immediate , the demonstrated their as natural , have River and Saguenay their response disasters role their
 their , impressed demonstrated floods have response role with . search disasters , as to as dedication such the region by and their River Saguenay peacekeeping heroic They natural me immediate their work and rescue and Red in their ,
 as , have region dedication and impressed Red disasters rescue by me and Saguenay such search role , in peacekeeping . their their natural , and immediate to response floods with the their They heroic their demonstrated as River work
 their with in me disasters their heroic their natural demonstrated the , to their . floods Saguenay work rescue and by , response Red as River region and , peacekeeping impressed as have such They immediate role search dedication and
 dedication and as , rescue . have demonstrated their to search Red with and role the They natural floods disasters their by as response work immediate their impressed peacekeeping me , their Saguenay heroic in and such , region River
 region and to by disasters , such as peacekeeping as search , have They demonstrated with and in the floods role . their their impressed , heroic rescue their response me River and Red work dedication Saguenay immediate natural their
 their such natural peacekeeping , and their search floods and , the in Red role . immediate their region heroic dedication They with work response their as , me Saguenay disasters as have impressed and to River demonstrated by rescue
 immediate have demonstrated with rescue River natural dedication in their by Red impressed as the , , disasters floods . region me to their work their Saguenay their and and role They as and peacekeeping , heroic search response such
 , by region demonstrated impressed Red as natural role their their search their , They in such disasters dedication peacekeeping . work as and the and with me , to River and response rescue Saguenay floods heroic their have immediate
 in , Red dedication Saguenay region , their as to and as their They and heroic demonstrated natural by . peacekeeping have their River their the search role rescue disasters response , immediate and work with such impressed floods me
 peacekeeping , rescue the disasters their demonstrated region in with , and heroic such have floods as their by . natural River search to Red dedication their Saguenay impressed work response They role immediate and as and me their ,
 as dedication , role me their in work heroic , search . response demonstrated and rescue with peacekeeping impressed immediate natural their Saguenay have Red and They region the their such to , floods disasters by and their River as
 and Red peacekeeping such and natural to rescue demonstrated with in response the disasters , their They , River , their dedication their work role as search immediate heroic me . and region impressed Saguenay floods as by have their
 me rescue their peacekeeping Red and Saguenay heroic role such , demonstrated with River to the and , and their region by They , . search as natural dedication their their floods immediate have in as impressed disasters work response
 role Red floods by They in to their response such peacekeeping as disasters immediate their rescue region their dedication Saguenay and with . and natural me work have River , as search their , impressed , demonstrated heroic and the
 floods such search region their as demonstrated impressed as dedication , their They . Red to and their their heroic role Saguenay disasters natural and peacekeeping response and work by rescue , the River , me have in immediate with
If he is so competent, what has this big brother been doing for 20 years? 
He agreed to give pension benefits to people, but forgot to levy what he needed to be able to do so, and what he levied, he loaned to the provinces at such low rates that, unless there are drastic changes, the plan will go bankrupt.  
Here we have a classic case of public mismanagement. 
On the one hand, they hand out goodies and, on the other, they forget to charge for them. 
And now they have learned nothing from this sad tale:
Ottawa is asking for even more from everyone and tells us that this time it will invest the money wisely and that it will be for the future good of all.  
Honourable senators, I would much more prefer looking after my own retirement, and I know many Canadians who would like to be free to do what they want with their own money.  
There are many other aspects of this bill that require serious consideration, but I will deal here with only one or two.  
The bill provides for the creation of a government agency responsible for investing the funds collected from contributors to the Canada Pension Plan.  
This agency will have more or less the same powers as the Caisse de dépôt du Québec. 
The management of these funds will therefore be given to a government monopoly, as was done with the generation and distribution of electricity.  
However, how can the performance of a monopoly be assessed? 
And do you know of any monopoly where unacceptable mismanagement did not occur at one time or another? 
There is a long list of unfortunate cases of poor management - we have all heard stories of the extravagant expense accounts of people in the public sector who think they own the jobs they are holding - of bad investments, such as those made in real estate by an agency like the one we are creating, for example, of consumer gouging - we have seen monopolies charge excessive rates, because they were the only ones providing the service - of unreasonable benefits, such as complete job security for employees at the expense of the taxpayer - as has occurred in crown corporations you are familiar with - of differences in economic and social objectives - this also happened when an agency was created and given a mandate, and then after 15 years, it started doing something else, we have all seen this - of conflicts of interest involving officials who make no difference between their personal interest and that of the public, et cetera.  
There is a long list of horror stories involving monopolies. 
The whole history of the public sector, here and elsewhere, is full of such unfortunate incidents. 
I will not speak here about what occurred in Eastern Europe or in the Communist Bloc. 
But in this country and in countries like France and England, such cases have been a constant feature of the past 15 or 20 years.  
You may tell me that such things also happen in the private sector. 
Of course, but in this case it is everybody's money that is at stake, and not just private funds.  
 They have impressed me with their dedication , as by their peacekeeping role , their heroic work in search and rescue , and their immediate response to natural disasters such as the Saguenay region and Red River floods .
 such , have demonstrated disasters me River dedication as to the response region . and Red rescue their and role natural They Saguenay by immediate with their impressed their and work as in , search peacekeeping , floods heroic
 as in with me natural role their their have . to search disasters rescue the their impressed , and immediate peacekeeping such their Red and dedication response demonstrated , heroic Saguenay and by work region , River as They
 work dedication me to their and Red natural floods rescue impressed peacekeeping with heroic , disasters their have , such demonstrated as Saguenay the immediate role , in their and . region They and response their by as search
Let me mention another source of great pride: the proclamation of the twenty-first of June, the longest day of the year, as National Aboriginal Day - a day to honour the First Peoples of this land.  
 of First : twenty of , the as . , the day a the great honour longest - National of the first Day to year Peoples me the of day - pride proclamation of this Let June source Aboriginal another mention land
 great the Aboriginal National Peoples : of of First the this , . the twenty of longest - year day as Day first the day another source me to the mention June of Let land - honour proclamation pride , a of
 the this day proclamation National - great year , the of the mention of - day First Day of of another longest Peoples the source of Let : to honour pride Aboriginal a me as land the first . June twenty ,
 the : National - another great longest of , to Let mention of pride as first twenty First source honour the of Aboriginal day me the the proclamation a June day of Peoples - land the Day of . , this year
 . the - Let of source as National pride - of day mention me Peoples June great Day to this year the twenty first the of , : of Aboriginal land day the honour proclamation the a longest , of another First
 , : Peoples year of day of a this twenty as of National . the , the proclamation the of to of - me source mention First great June land the Aboriginal another day pride longest Day first Let - honour the
 another : this source first proclamation the day twenty pride Peoples of to of mention day - me the First honour great Day of of as June . a the longest - National the land the Let year of , , Aboriginal
 the year day day Let land as of longest the me of source National the Peoples Day First , mention . great - Aboriginal honour of the this first a proclamation pride of another - , to of the twenty June :
 year the to the this source day the of the as : Let longest land day , another honour of twenty of First National , of me first pride great proclamation the - - mention a Day Peoples . Aboriginal of June
 longest source honour a . the - Peoples year June land day Day First the proclamation , this : Let another - the the twenty of to great me mention day Aboriginal , of of pride the as of of National first
 great - the the of another first twenty pride day - to this of Aboriginal land the longest honour June , proclamation mention Day a me First Peoples , of of National year Let as day . the the : source of
 - Peoples the a the June great me first another proclamation source of the land this Day the of of the National : mention , Let day - . year , Aboriginal honour to day pride longest of First of as twenty
 as twenty the land of day to - Day another National longest . the of of Aboriginal Let year - June the honour of a of first day source this me First proclamation mention , Peoples , the great the : pride
 of the Let another Peoples longest June - Day the of of twenty year this honour the mention proclamation National day as land day , : Aboriginal of , the - . great the First pride first me to source a of
 the another great proclamation as to year of the the National me Let honour June Aboriginal of First day this a day of first land - Peoples longest , . Day - twenty , of pride the the of source : mention
 twenty the pride National the - , day the . another land proclamation as to first me of longest Day great of Peoples the a : of Aboriginal , of mention this day the June Let source of - honour year First
The Senate met at 2:00 p.m., the Speaker in the Chair.  
Prayers.  
Pages Exchange Program with House of Commons 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, before I call for Senators' Statements, I should like to introduce the two pages who are with us this week through the exchange program with the House of Commons.  
They are Anne McCulluch of Calgary, Alberta, who is pursuing studies in journalism at Carleton University.  
Kirk Nangreaves of Saint-Hubert, Quebec, is studying at the University of Ottawa Arts Faculty.  
He is majoring in psychology.  
On behalf of all senators and the Senate, I bid you welcome.  
SENATORS' STATEMENTS 
The Senate 
Response to Newspaper Article on Senator's Residency Qualifications 
Hon. Colin Kenny :
Honourable senators, I rise today on behalf of a colleague who cannot be present, Senator Paul Lucier. 
Senator Lucier has sent me a fax which he has asked me to communicate to the chamber. 
For your benefit, he wants me to reply to the comments made about him in the media recently.  
He writes: 
I would like to make some points with respect to this matter: 
The Citizen said: "Paul Lucier said the Senate's legal staff approved his change in residency five years ago when he moved to Vancouver."  
Senator Lucier says: 
 Let me mention another source of pride : the proclamation of the twenty - first of June , the longest day of the year , as National Aboriginal Day - a day to honour the First Peoples of this land .
 Peoples me proclamation , - the first day , year mention Day Aboriginal of the to of National day Let this . land the great : honour twenty source as the of First longest the - of a of June pride
 twenty the of . day of Peoples , , of the year day Day this longest pride a proclamation honour to - the me of Let National great : source June Aboriginal first - the as the mention of land another
 , longest First the as of day a me to this the honour year . source great of Peoples twenty Let another of - day the : pride National land of , June Day the mention proclamation first Aboriginal the of
A New Parliament...  
 New Parliament ... A
 ... Parliament A New
 ... A New Parliament
 New Parliament ... A
 ... A Parliament New
 Parliament New ... A
 Parliament A ... New
 New ... Parliament A
 New Parliament ... A
 Parliament ... A New
 New Parliament ... A
 New A Parliament ...
 A Parliament New ...
 Parliament A ... New
 ... A Parliament New
 New Parliament A ...
The list of witnesses changed almost from hour to hour. 
Some witnesses had only a few hours' notice that they would be appearing before the committee, and their presentations suffered as a result, as they said themselves.  
Under such conditions, it was quite normal that participation in the committee could have been interpreted as sanctioning the conditions imposed by and for the government. 
However, this was an issue that was worth risking this false interpretation, because the Parliament of Canada is dealing with a request from the Quebec National Assembly, with its sovereignist majority, to exempt Quebec from certain constitutional obligations it has had to live with for 130 years.  
Unfortunately, there was not enough time to involve the committee in preparatory briefings in order for it to have as complete an appreciation and understanding as possible of all the implications of Quebec's resolution. 
As a result, it tended to stray from the substance of the reference before it. 
"Religious education," "religious instruction," "denominational schools," "confessional schools," "linguistic rights," "minority rights" and other terms were used so often that they tended to become interchangeable to the point that they occasionally melded together.  
Section 93 was a result of a compromise at a time when two religious beliefs dominated everyday life in Canada to an extent hard to describe today when even one's most difficult moral decisions are usually self-determined, rather than imposed without question by a recognized higher authority. 
In 1867, Catholics and Protestants were guaranteed certain privileges which were not even considered for other religious denominations. 
Their numbers and influences were such that the idea that a section 93 was nothing else but a deserved right did not even arise.  
In the early 1980s, when a Canadian constitution was being debated, section 93 remained as it was written in 1867, despite the fact that Canadian society had evolved to the point where the debate we are now having should have been held then. 
Even more to the point, the authors of the Constitution Act recognized that section 93's limitations to two privileged Christian beliefs would conflict with the Charter's anti-discrimination implications, so much so that section 93 was provided immunity from the Charter in section 29. 
Indeed, section 29 could not be clearer. 
It reads as follows: 
Nothing in this Charter abrogates or derogates from any rights or privileges guaranteed by or under the Constitution of Canada in respect of denominational, separate or dissentient schools.  
Why the issue of confessional schools as well as other issues crying out for change, such as Senate reform, were left untouched during the long debate before and during patriation and surrounding the Constitution Act itself is for those who were there at the time to explain. 
Certainly a golden opportunity was lost to give Canada a basic law more in tune with modern Canadian society, except for the adoption of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 
Even it is not without its flaws, not the least being the notwithstanding clause which can be subjected to abuse. 
Perhaps all of this is a reflection of the one constant which has marked Canada since its origins, a country identified by its extraordinary political and social diversity and contradictions.  
In any event, we are faced with a request from the Quebec National Assembly to be removed from the obligations to maintain formal Catholic and Protestant school structures in the cities of Montreal and Quebec City and to maintain minority or dissentient Catholic and Protestant schools outside those areas at the request of minority Catholic or Protestant parents, as the case may be. 
 New Parliament ...
 Parliament A New
 A ... Parliament
 New ... Parliament
Today marks the opening of a new Parliament, the last Parliament of the 20th century and the first Parliament of the 21st century, a Parliament with a unique and historic opportunity to provide leadership on national issues to secure the future for Canadians.  
 opportunity secure historic national the to for with the Parliament Canadians 20th . Parliament provide future on Today century the Parliament the 21st Parliament , the marks and a leadership a new and , first unique issues opening century last to of a of of the
 of century a of the issues historic . national a of , the provide 20th the Parliament Parliament Parliament a on unique and Parliament for future to Canadians the leadership opening , Today last with new century and first marks the opportunity to 21st secure the
 future unique the the marks 21st a , the opportunity secure Parliament Today Canadians historic Parliament 20th and for opening of to of with century the Parliament and the provide , of century leadership a . Parliament last a first issues national on to the new
 leadership to unique Today issues on provide for and the Parliament historic 20th , the future last Parliament a national of Parliament the and the of marks to Canadians opening first new , century . opportunity with 21st of Parliament the secure the century a a
 historic provide last the the the . of new Parliament 21st national Canadians with marks to future a on and for leadership the Today Parliament , unique , a opportunity and Parliament century secure of first century Parliament to a 20th opening the of issues the
 national marks opening and of a to Parliament unique and historic new of with century secure the . 20th provide issues for , last Today the the future Parliament Parliament a the century first leadership a Parliament , the the opportunity on of 21st to Canadians
 of . and the Today national unique opening 21st of first with , secure Canadians to , the and century a marks leadership Parliament a future the for Parliament new of the century on Parliament historic the the provide opportunity to Parliament 20th issues a last
 20th the Parliament with . unique secure , national of century to historic a issues opportunity and Today , Parliament century provide the the the first new leadership opening for and future Parliament marks a Parliament last 21st the to of Canadians a of on the
 to Parliament with secure leadership new historic a to , last the on , opening provide first of of of the the issues Parliament the a the Parliament marks . and Today opportunity future a unique 21st Parliament the 20th national for century Canadians century and
 leadership , marks Canadians national century opportunity for with on the and Parliament and unique new Parliament the to a to historic provide Parliament last 20th first opening future Parliament 21st of the Today a the the of issues century , a of . secure the
 Parliament secure of the a future unique Canadians the Parliament , to of on historic of 21st and Today century new the with the and opportunity 20th leadership issues the century provide a last to opening Parliament for Parliament . a the , national marks first
 of national Canadians and Parliament marks century issues to Parliament new leadership with 21st unique historic , opening first 20th of provide for a the the and Parliament on last the the to secure a . a , Parliament the of the future century Today opportunity
 the to for a a Parliament first of the the issues Today . of a to future secure , of century national leadership marks and unique historic Parliament 20th opportunity , 21st Parliament the Canadians on and with last century the new Parliament provide the opening
 Parliament and to , last a issues a on new of century secure of historic Parliament . Parliament and Canadians the the Today a the unique the leadership 20th first , opportunity provide the the Parliament of national marks to for with future opening 21st century
 with first a of of marks issues provide and century secure century Canadians new Parliament unique future to national the a Today historic the opening Parliament a the to the for 20th the , Parliament and on of leadership . the opportunity , 21st Parliament last
 new a last secure leadership opportunity Parliament unique Parliament 21st provide Canadians , a marks to first for to of the and the century the the historic . a and on the future of century of Parliament opening issues Today national Parliament with the , 20th
The issue is that Wednesday, in our common understanding, was to be a short day to allow committees to sit on Wednesday afternoons.  
Not just today but at other times, Senator Stewart has brought to our attention the fact that committees operate on that assumption and arrange their business plans, only to be frustrated in executing their business plan by the Senate going way beyond 3:00 or 3:30 p.m. on Wednesday afternoons.  
Senator Stewart has explained to us that that is the main concern. 
He would like some assurance from the leadership on both sides that, on Wednesdays, we would try harder to respect that tradition. 
We on this side agree to make every effort to complete our work on Wednesday afternoons at around 3:00 or 3:15 p.m. If you can also agree, perhaps we do not need to have this motion.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, is leave granted?  
Senator Kinsella :
It depends upon the answer.  
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, we must make an effort to allow committees to sit. 
They do invite witnesses, many of whom come from out of town. 
We inconvenience them if we are not able to hear from them.  
I must congratulate senators on this side who have refrained, for the most part, from making Senators' Statements on Wednesdays, unless it was something quite urgent, as was Senator Kenny's statement today. 
They have tried to make their speeches on either Tuesdays or Thursdays. 
Senators on the other side have attempted to do the same thing. 
With that level of cooperation, perhaps at some time in the future we can invoke a more formal process whereby there will be some guarantee to committee chairs.  
Barring that formal process, Senator Stewart has witnesses to hear from tomorrow, and I should like him to have permission to hear those witnesses tomorrow.  
Hon. John Lynch-Staunton (Leader of the Opposition) :
That worked for a while. 
 Today marks the opening of a new Parliament , the last Parliament of the 20th century and the first Parliament of the 21st , a Parliament with a unique and historic opportunity to provide leadership on national issues to secure the future for Canadians .
 a Parliament historic and to last first the 21st with provide a of secure Canadians of Today century issues and the . Parliament the marks the Parliament the opportunity future on leadership national unique , new for opening to of 20th Parliament century a the
 Canadians of a to the provide , and century 21st Today of Parliament for last issues leadership Parliament opening unique the secure marks national Parliament of , and on historic a new a the the with 20th to first future . century Parliament the the
 . Parliament 20th a a future the historic the leadership opening first the , and of 21st century to Parliament new Parliament unique the Today secure a Parliament the the last opportunity with for , to of Canadians of marks on century and issues provide
On June 2, 1997, the people of Canada renewed the mandate of the Government. 
 2 June of the the mandate Canada the 1997 people Government , On renewed of . ,
 Canada the 2 the of . mandate Government renewed , people , June 1997 On the of
 Government of the 2 Canada the , the On renewed , mandate people of 1997 . June
 , 1997 the 2 Canada , of On the of people the renewed . mandate Government June
 On , of renewed Canada Government the mandate the 1997 2 of , the . June people
 Government the mandate of 2 , 1997 On the June the renewed of people , Canada .
 , of the mandate . June renewed of Government people On Canada 1997 the , 2 the
 the On renewed 2 mandate June Government people of 1997 Canada , , of the . the
 renewed of the , people , 1997 . of the the 2 Canada Government mandate June On
 the Canada of people of 2 , June On the 1997 Government the , mandate . renewed
 . June mandate people the Government On the , renewed 2 of Canada of , 1997 the
 of people . , mandate June the 1997 2 the Government of Canada On , renewed the
 of 1997 2 mandate the of , June Canada the Government On the people renewed , .
 mandate people of , Canada , 1997 the renewed On . the the of Government 2 June
 Canada mandate people of , the 1997 2 Government June the , the renewed . On of
 the mandate 1997 , , the On of renewed of . Government Canada 2 the people June
A parliamentary review is therefore vital before their implementation.  
In concluding, I would say to the government that the preferable alternative to its bill would be to simply oblige everyone in the labour force in Canada to invest a percentage of their savings in funds under private management or let government assume its role by providing a safety net for those who could not set aside enough money for their old age.  
Here is an intelligent response to the challenge before us. 
However, and it is regrettable in this era of the welfare state, it seems to me that we prefer to make sweeping rules that apply to everyone in order to resolve the problem of a few.  
Hon. Philippe Deane Gigantès :
You talk with admiration of private investment management. 
How do you explain the disaster at Olympia & York, for example, under the management of Mr. Eyton, our colleague, and the fact that major players like Conrad Black closed Dominion Stores and took the money Dominion Stores employees had invested in a pension fund, a fund they never drew from? 
Are you telling us that the private sector will be more generous and wise than the Caisse de dépôt in Quebec? 
Senator Bolduc :
I did not say disasters did not happen in the private sector. 
Senator Gigantès :
It is not a big deal if you have $3 million, but it is if you lose $35,000 or $70,000 and this is all the money you have. 
It may not be a big deal for you, but it is for small investors.  
Senator Bolduc :
Honourable senators, I never said there would not be any damage in the private sector. 
Some damage is done every day. 
But it is the private sector. 
What you are doing with this bill is giving enormous powers to a few people with money belonging to all Canadians, particularly the poor. 
It is serious because we do not know how long this will last. 
Bills at second reading are always good measures. 
 June 2 , 1997 , the people of Canada renewed the mandate of the Government .
 of Government 1997 , renewed , . 2 June the Canada of people the mandate the
 , 1997 June the 2 the people Government the Canada On , of mandate renewed of
 . 1997 the , 2 people the Government the mandate June Canada of , On renewed
Over the course of this Parliament, the Government will fulfil the commitments it made to the people in its election platform.  
 of in people fulfil the this Parliament made it Government will to , platform commitments course its . election Over the the the
 the , its it in the commitments this fulfil will the . course of the platform Parliament Government Over election made to people
 course . , election Government to of it fulfil made the will Parliament Over its the this commitments platform the the people in
 , of in fulfil this people the the election . Parliament the it Over made Government course its commitments the will to platform
 the to . of fulfil in the its Over commitments Parliament , course this the people made will the Government election it platform
 fulfil commitments the its it election course to Over made will , the platform Parliament the Government in of people this . the
 made to of it , fulfil the . election the platform this course Parliament the Government will the commitments its Over people in
 the fulfil this in the Government its course Parliament people will . it of made Over election , to platform commitments the the
 made it Parliament election its of platform the the Over course commitments . in to the fulfil will , the Government people this
 made commitments this its Government will of Over the to the election it platform fulfil . , the the Parliament in people course
 course , people . of to election platform the its the it this commitments Over the the Government will made fulfil Parliament in
 its people the in Government of commitments the Over this election Parliament platform will . it fulfil the course , made the to
 will in of the . platform the , course Over the the this people fulfil election to its Government made it Parliament commitments
 people the , commitments in the platform this it Government will to its election made Parliament Over the the fulfil . of course
 the will the people course its it the of this made the platform Over to Parliament , . Government fulfil commitments in election
 election people this the Government in the course made platform its . Over the fulfil Parliament , it to of commitments the will
In Quebec, when the problem came up in connection with the pension plan in 1966, we insisted on having our own plan. 
I am not saying that this is how it should be across Canada; that is not my point. 
What I am saying is that, in Quebec, at the time, Jean Lesage had made it very clear that the fund was designed to provide social security. 
That is why we fought so hard for the Caisse de dépôt et placement at the time: to have this flexibility.  
I am not saying this practice should be generalized and extended to Ontario or any other province; it may cause problems I had not thought of so far. 
There is no doubt that it could be more difficult for some provinces. 
I do not exclude however the idea that provincial politicians could bring pressure to bear on this organization so that, when investments are made, people from each region benefit. 
To what extent will ethics and conflict of interest rules be overlooked? 
My experience tells me and I can tell you that it is going to be complicated.  
Hon. Terry Stratton :
Honourable senators, I should like participate in the debate on Bill C-2, the Canada Pension Plan.  
They were informed; and they could understand the information they were being given.  
At the end of every television interview, the finance minister reiterated that, if they did not like the private sector pension plan, they could stick with the public sector pension plan. 
He did this all the way through, for months, until it came time for the people to decide which plan they wanted.  
Within the first six weeks, 25 per cent of the public were in the private pension plan. 
Today, 90 per cent of the public are in the private pension plan, and that plan is doing extremely well. 
Despite the crisis with the Mexican peso, which involves their next door neighbour, their equity market survived, and is, in fact, doing well. 
Investors are getting good returns.  
Two lessons are to be learned from that. 
First, a communication plan on the part of the government can sell a fund that is fundamentally sound; and, second, a private pension plan can work.  
 Over the course of this Parliament , the Government fulfil the commitments it made to the people in its election platform .
 this course . the the the platform in Government fulfil made to Over of the , will its people commitments election Parliament
 its election fulfil Over the made commitments platform will , of . the in this Parliament people the the course Government to
 Over people to its , Parliament in of commitments the the this . will election it course fulfil the the made Government
The Parliament of Canada is the only institution directly elected by all Canadians with the mandate to protect and express the national interest. 
 the Parliament and elected the with by interest national express Canadians is all directly only . institution The the to mandate Canada protect of
 elected directly Canada is The all institution by the of protect interest to express only with the Canadians Parliament the and . mandate national
 the all by with directly and Canada of protect Canadians is institution the express interest national The only the to elected . Parliament mandate
 of protect institution to the is national by all Canadians only the Canada . elected mandate and the Parliament directly express interest with The
 The . institution national protect interest all the directly to Canada mandate elected Canadians only express and by Parliament the with of is the
 the the by Canada interest The directly of Canadians mandate and Parliament elected institution is with national express all . only protect the to
 express . by mandate interest all Parliament directly national Canadians the is protect and of the The elected only with the to Canada institution
 only the Canadians is by with directly . mandate the protect of and all Parliament Canada institution The the express interest elected national to
 institution all is to of with and Parliament . interest express elected mandate the by protect only Canadians the The directly Canada national the
 by protect to only the all Canadians the express with and mandate institution national elected interest . of the directly is Canada The Parliament
 Parliament Canadians elected the directly only . national express is Canada the by mandate the all and to protect institution with The interest of
 The the the express by the to and directly institution is of all national Canada Canadians Parliament mandate only interest elected with protect .
 by express elected The directly Parliament of all is with national interest and to the mandate the the institution only Canadians . protect Canada
 Parliament all institution and the only is Canada elected the Canadians by mandate express to with national of the interest . The protect directly
 Parliament with Canadians Canada interest institution The mandate is express the national of to all . elected only protect directly and the by the
 is only . of The with to Canada and institution Parliament express directly all protect mandate Canadians the by the the elected national interest
They will have some reduced benefits and some increased costs. 
To those people who have been paying all their lives - that is, all the baby boomers who will begin to turn 50 - they will receive benefits and be faced with another 15 years of increased costs.  
I will tell you for whom this is important. 
I have a daughter who is 24 and a son who is 21. 
Many of you have children and grandchildren. 
The government is asking them to pay 9.9 per cent - I am sure it is 9.9 per cent because the minister wanted the number to be under the figure 10. That represents 10 per cent of their income, and it will increase with inflation. 
The $35,000 that they pay on today will inevitably be more tomorrow.  
As inflation eats away at it and the numbers rise, that number remains the same. 
This goes against everything we have ever done on this program since its inception in 1966. 
It stays the same. 
In 10 or 15 years, that $3,500 will be worth $1,500, $1,000, $500, depending on what government does and what happens to inflation.  
Senator Taylor :
Elect the Liberals and it will be high!  
Senator Tkachuk :
If we elect the Liberals, inflation will be high? 
We already know that! 
Let me continue in that vein. 
Perhaps honourable senators opposite do not want to hear what Paul Martin will be doing, and the explaining that you will have to do back home in 10 or 15 years when your children ask you what you did about this bill. 
When they retire, their CPP benefits will be worth about what they put in, plus 2.5 per cent.  
I do not get it. 
 The Parliament of Canada is the only institution directly elected by Canadians with the mandate to protect and express the national interest .
 the only express Canada to all Parliament the and the . interest institution mandate directly by Canadians national elected is of with The
 all the . national only Canada elected the directly protect express and to of by is the mandate Parliament interest Canadians The with
 elected only is by the express all with interest Parliament the of directly The Canadians Canada institution mandate national the protect . to
Elected by all Canadians and endowed with the legitimacy that this bestows, the Government of Canada will stand up for the shared values of Canadians at home and abroad.  
 , and Canadians Government Canadians endowed Canada abroad . of bestows Elected at shared of the the this legitimacy that all for stand up with values by the home and will
 all abroad and and up will endowed the values the stand of Canadians Government this that shared . , for of home at by the Canada bestows Elected with legitimacy Canadians
 , by shared Canada stand endowed will the for of the and . and at the this home Canadians abroad that with of Elected up Canadians all bestows Government values legitimacy
 legitimacy Canada will Canadians up Government and Canadians the , Elected of stand abroad of that for shared with endowed by at home bestows and . the the values this all
 Canadians values by will and up shared the at . , abroad of Canadians legitimacy that endowed Government stand with all the Elected the bestows of this and home Canada for
 of of and the Canada . Canadians the with stand home this Canadians for the that will , values shared Government by Elected legitimacy abroad all and up bestows endowed at
 all and of the abroad legitimacy Canadians for at bestows Government , with home values Canada the this and endowed of that . by stand the shared Canadians up will Elected
 the abroad with Government of at and this home stand shared . bestows will , of the that all the Canadians values Canada and for legitimacy Elected endowed by Canadians up
 by that for and Canada Canadians values endowed up Government of , abroad with the . this the legitimacy shared stand home will Canadians of all and at Elected the bestows
 that the the legitimacy stand values Canada with up Canadians the will endowed and , all bestows . Elected by Government shared of abroad Canadians this at for and home of
 Canadians endowed for values bestows Canada Canadians Government at of legitimacy abroad this will and stand the up . Elected with of shared home the all that and , by the
 Canada for by the at up of endowed the Canadians legitimacy bestows stand the values of . home , this with and shared Elected all Government Canadians will abroad and that
 the bestows home Government Canadians for stand . , Elected Canada abroad by with Canadians the values and at the will legitimacy this endowed of of all that shared and up
 the the , values stand at Canadians legitimacy will Elected the Canada this all Canadians of for by with shared . and endowed up bestows that and abroad Government home of
 values Elected will and the of up . the legitimacy of stand the that by all Canadians Canada home and Canadians abroad , Government shared endowed this with for bestows at
 of Canadians by that for legitimacy , Elected and up with the Government at abroad values this stand endowed all will Canada bestows and shared home Canadians of . the the
The crux of this whole taxation matter came about on November 26, when I asked the following question of the Leader of the Government in the Senate: 
On October 1 of this year, Senator Meighen asked a question concerning employment insurance. 
On October 23, I asked a further question, referring to my colleague's earlier question. 
I received a response yesterday to my question, and I wish to read it into the record. 
This concerns employment insurance and the reserve. 
It states: 
A reserve is necessary, since it makes it possible to apply more stable premium rates throughout the economic cycle, thus making it possible to avoid increasing them in a recessionary period. 
In addition, the reserve makes it possible to ensure there are sufficient funds to pay benefits when they are most necessary.  
What happened in the last recession was a $2 billion surplus in the Employment Insurance Account turned into a $6 billion deficit in two years, and it was necessary to increase premiums by 30% at what was already a difficult time for job creation. 
Consequently, the government believes that it is wise to establish a reserve in the Employment Insurance Account.  
I am assuming that since you have given me this response, that was indeed the strategy on the part of the government.  
I then went on to say: 
If I may, I will quote from The Financial Post of today, November 26, a 1997. 
An editorial entitled "EI surplus is a deficit-reduction tax" states clearly that the EI will result: 
...in an accumulated surplus suspected to top a scandalous $19 billion by the end of 1998. 
If you need $8 billion to look after a recession, using the last recession as the example, what kind of recession are you planning on?  
That is to say, what kind of recession are they planning on in the future with a reserve of $18 billion?  
Provincial finance ministers met in Ottawa. 
I think last night they had dinner with Finance Minister Paul Martin. 
In an article in The Globe and Mail yesterday, it was stated: 
 Elected by all Canadians and endowed with the legitimacy that this bestows , the Government of Canada will stand up for the shared of Canadians at home and abroad .
 Government Canadians Canadians , will of with and legitimacy at this . values endowed of all the for Canada by home Elected the shared up abroad that bestows stand the
 will the that legitimacy abroad up shared Canadians all Canadians for this Government the . , by values with and Elected of home the bestows stand and of Canada at
 and home of . up stand of and abroad the bestows the endowed , Elected values shared the legitimacy for this will Government Canada with that Canadians Canadians all at
But governing in the 21st century also means recognizing that no one government can act alone. 
 government . also 21st can century in governing means But that the one no act alone recognizing
 one in act the no But that alone 21st recognizing also government governing . century means can
 century also But . no act that 21st recognizing in the can governing means alone one government
 means can But alone act in 21st governing one the century government that also . no recognizing
 no But in recognizing one . act the also alone 21st can century means governing that government
 that can . the 21st alone governing But government act in also no one means recognizing century
 But in 21st that also governing no recognizing century can alone government means the act . one
 also recognizing . in century But alone the can act governing means 21st government that no one
 that act the also can . 21st in governing means But one alone century government recognizing no
 means alone can 21st . But one that act governing the in recognizing government also no century
 that government act also can the But . means one century alone in 21st no recognizing governing
 in . no one government that can alone But century means governing recognizing 21st act the also
 also governing that in one 21st government means the But no century alone recognizing . can act
 that can . no century government the in 21st governing act one recognizing also alone means But
 . alone But means century government the act recognizing that in no 21st governing one can also
 21st no . means act But can governing recognizing government one that also alone century the in
I commend Senator Cools for bringing this amendment forward at this time. 
She often acts as our conscience, and I, for one, would like to thank her for all the hard work she puts into researching the bills that come before us.  
Senator Phillips :
Honourable senators, I was rather reluctant to enter this debate because I do not have a legal mind. 
Then the thought occurred to me that most lawyers do not either - and that includes a number of them in this chamber.  
My interest in this subject was piqued by a newspaper article where a detective was complaining about the awkward situation he would be in if this bill passed. 
Formerly, if he was pursuing someone into an apartment building, he could go in under the provisions of a hot pursuit and arrest the individual. 
Now, if the person being pursued enters an apartment building, and there are 50 or 60 apartments in the building, the detective is worrying that when he goes to a judge to get a warrant, does he have to get a warrant for each of the apartments in the building, because he really does not know which one he is in.  
Two people said they saw Mr. Feeney drive Mr. Boyle's truck from the scene. 
The police followed a truck to Mr. Feeney's residence. 
They found the truck parked outside the trailer, with blood leading from the truck into the trailer. 
They followed the normal procedure of knocking on the door and announcing they were police, and there was no answer. 
They said the door was open and they entered. 
There they found Mr. Feeney asleep. 
Obviously the bludgeoning of the victim had tired him and he had gone to sleep. 
He still had blood on his face and on his shirt. 
The police checked the trailer, and they found the money, stolen from Mr. Boyle, hidden under the mattress. 
They arrested Mr. Feeney under a warrantless arrest.  
I think that individual must have been trained by Sergeant Fiegenwald because there was certainly every reason to arrest Mr. Feeney.  
Prior to the Constitution Act, 1982, the police had that authority in the case of hot pursuit. 
 governing in the 21st century also means recognizing that no one government can act alone .
 century government that . also the means act alone But recognizing 21st no can one in
 . governing the century alone But recognizing that also government 21st one act can no in
 can But recognizing no governing that alone also . means 21st one act government in century
Given the complexity of the issues that face us as citizens in a global economy, collaboration is an essential ingredient for the success of Canada. 
 success Canada for global . complexity of the ingredient essential Given us the an , economy collaboration that citizens face the as of in is issues a
 the us the essential that ingredient Given global complexity , is citizens . as a success of in Canada for an the issues of economy face collaboration
 Canada , ingredient the economy citizens of global is the an of success essential in . us that for as face Given the issues a collaboration complexity
 success . the issues essential collaboration in citizens for ingredient global an us the of that is the face as Given complexity of economy a Canada ,
 the economy a global complexity essential the ingredient face that of an in success the Given us for . issues as is Canada of , collaboration citizens
 economy Canada success citizens a for us face . that in of collaboration of as an ingredient issues complexity Given global essential is , the the the
 an complexity issues . the of the a that essential the success ingredient face as Canada global of collaboration citizens for , in is us Given economy
 Given ingredient the essential citizens of us collaboration the the complexity as success a global in Canada an for . face issues of that economy is ,
 issues of that in . is an global economy ingredient face for Canada Given as , a the the the success us collaboration of complexity essential citizens
 that for face us collaboration . is issues the a , ingredient of essential global as success Canada complexity in the an of Given economy the citizens
 face is the essential for issues of the Given that as citizens economy global an us the a ingredient . Canada complexity of collaboration success in ,
 collaboration for global an that . of ingredient the citizens complexity success a issues us Given the the face , of in essential economy is Canada as
 economy that issues success the Given us of essential an face as complexity a the . the for collaboration of is in , citizens ingredient Canada global
 of Canada . collaboration that economy an citizens Given success , global as essential face us is the for ingredient of the in the issues complexity a
 us as Canada , issues the Given collaboration that economy in of ingredient a for face success of an is the global citizens the essential . complexity
 essential complexity the issues in economy a citizens face is us ingredient Given of an collaboration , of that as for global the the . success Canada
All this may be true, but there are still Quebecers who feel that by adopting the resolution they will be abandoned by the very Parliament whose responsibility it is to protect them.  
I wish to end my remarks by quoting from an opinion which was given to the Quebec government by what is known as the Catholic Committee of the Education Council of the province of Quebec, a consultative body which is asked to give its views on issues affecting the Catholic religion in schools. 
This opinion was written and delivered following the hearings of the joint committee. 
It is very pertinent that we are all aware of them.  
I wish to quote from four paragraphs, and I am not quoting them out of context, as the sentiment in the four paragraphs I will quote reflect the tone of the entire paper. 
The implications of the constitutional amendment requested by the Quebec government are not easy to interpret or measure accurately. 
Concerns and objections have been expressed, particularly by the English Catholic and French Protestant minorities. 
Experts in constitutional law have said that the amendment could have a surprising impact, far beyond the limited effects usually referred to in the media. 
The public may have trouble grasping the real scope of what is happening or making its views known because it does not have access to the necessary information and means of communication. 
It must therefore be acknowledged that if Parliament grants the request, public support for the amendment is less certain than support for the creation of linguistic school boards....  
Bill 109 - 
- which is the Quebec Education Act passed in June - 
- upholds the principle of freedom of choice in schooling. 
However, the debates of the Joint Committee of the House of Commons and Senate highlighted the fact that the legislation in this area will be jeopardized the moment Quebec is excluded from the application of subsections 1 to 4 of section 93. 
The Committee therefore believes that the amendment could turn out to be something of a time bomb unless the Quebec government is prepared to renew the notwithstanding clauses or look for a better alternative that would allow it to retain in practical terms its authority to enact legislation on denominational schools....  
Finally: 
The Catholic Committee therefore strongly urges the Government of Quebec to immediately find a legal provision, constitutional or otherwise, that would allow it to strike a balance between the requirements of the Charters, including the requirements of section 41 of the Quebec Charter, and the legitimate expectations expressed by the public. 
Such a provision would rid the government of the dilemma described above concerning the use or elimination of the notwithstanding clauses. 
More importantly, it would allow a genuine democratic debate over a new social pact in the area of religious education.  
Given their authorship, I think we have to reflect seriously on these thoughts.  
 Given the complexity of the issues that face us as citizens in a global economy , collaboration is an essential ingredient for the success Canada .
 essential global for . Canada a , issues the ingredient the Given the complexity us collaboration an that success economy citizens in face of of as
 Given for an that of , Canada essential collaboration success the economy of as . us face in citizens global the complexity ingredient is issues a
 is an economy Canada of . , collaboration us the the the issues face for ingredient global citizens complexity Given of essential as success that a
More than ever, Canadians want their governments to work together in partnership.  
 together governments partnership work their Canadians than , in want to . ever More
 together . Canadians want , than work their partnership ever to in More governments
 More , governments together their in than ever want Canadians partnership work to .
 More partnership in their , together . work to ever want governments than Canadians
 partnership than in . their to work want governments More Canadians ever , together
 work ever together their , partnership to . governments in More want than Canadians
 want than , More to work ever their partnership Canadians . in together governments
 . in governments More their than to , want together partnership work Canadians ever
 in ever Canadians . , together More to partnership work governments their want than
 in . their than want partnership to work together governments ever Canadians , More
 work governments their to together partnership . More ever Canadians than want , in
 More ever together to want governments in . than their Canadians , work partnership
 ever Canadians than partnership their work in More want to together , . governments
 partnership want , work in Canadians . together their ever than to More governments
 work than More in governments , ever together partnership . to Canadians their want
 their want together partnership . More in ever , work Canadians governments to than
Honourable senators, I move, on behalf of Senator Rompkey, the adoption of this report.  
Motion agreed to and report adopted.  
Telecommunications Act Teleglobe Canada Reorganization and Divestiture Act 
Bill to Amend-First Reading 
The Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C-17, to amend the Telecommunications Act and the Teleglobe Canada Reorganization and Divestiture Act. 
Bill read first time.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this bill be read the second time?  
On motion of Senator Carstairs, bill placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading on Thursday, December 11, 1997.  
Canada Marine Bill 
First Reading 
The Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C-9, for making the system of Canadian ports competitive, efficient and commercially oriented, providing for the establishing of port authorities and the divesting of certain harbours and ports, for the commercialization of the St. Lawrence Seaway and ferry services and other matters related to maritime trade and transport and amending the Pilotage Act and amending and repealing other Acts as a consequence.  
Bill read first time.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this bill be read the second time?  
On motion of Senator Carstairs, bill placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading on Thursday, December 11, 1997.  
Aboriginal Peoples 
Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples-Committee Authorized to Study Recommendations 
Hon. Charlie Watt , pursuant to notice of December 8, 1997, moved: 
That the Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal Peoples be authorized to examine and report upon the recommendations of the Royal Commission Report on Aboriginal Peoples (Sessional paper 2/35-508.) 
 More than ever Canadians want their governments to work together in partnership .
 to together want in Canadians their partnership ever than , governments More .
 together Canadians their in partnership More ever want governments work , to .
 partnership their work More , Canadians ever . in want together to than
As we look forward to the beginning of a new millennium with new challenges and new opportunities, we can look back at the last century of Canadian history and state with certainty that Canada is rightly regarded, the world over, as an extraordinary success. 
 at , regarded back a over an , as Canadian with and the look extraordinary that new , of beginning state certainty of world forward success new millennium we new . century we to rightly and the As last is opportunities challenges with can history look Canada the
 new , the world with Canada over look a to we state with new and is look certainty forward we of challenges century success the can Canadian at extraordinary an millennium , new , the rightly last opportunities that history . and back As beginning of as regarded
 as world we , century forward , millennium history and look certainty look regarded we the new of an with new Canadian challenges that beginning the . back extraordinary As last rightly over , of new can a at opportunities with is state success the and Canada to
 to at state success beginning an challenges the a new . rightly century back that world extraordinary is last look and , the millennium new we over , Canada new , history can we Canadian look As forward of and with regarded of the opportunities as certainty with
 over is , state can world extraordinary last look back beginning As the millennium the a with with regarded as of look the new and forward certainty new that we we new challenges success to Canadian , century , and of history at Canada an . opportunities rightly
 Canada an we that , we last new of and world look , of over with millennium century . regarded success to can rightly and at back extraordinary certainty , the history a as with is the look Canadian beginning new new the forward opportunities state As challenges
 history opportunities can of new of back challenges Canadian to , rightly Canada . world the certainty with success beginning as we the , we and a forward look extraordinary is millennium look , and last state at that As with new new regarded the an over century
 with over certainty century an Canada , and new with is that , regarded the state challenges opportunities rightly look , of millennium we as at of success As world extraordinary the new to a . back we forward new history can and the look beginning last Canadian
 with can the of opportunities Canadian regarded the is and look back an beginning that state forward last , millennium new we new we history . over rightly of at world look , new to the certainty challenges As Canada and a extraordinary success as , century with
 an As new that challenges , and back with as certainty regarded beginning century Canada rightly we look can look of Canadian state the last with new at . and we success to extraordinary new over of opportunities forward , history , is world the the a millennium
 last success new century , the at of that regarded an , to and new look a of state and . certainty can the beginning history back we , look rightly with world new As opportunities Canadian we extraordinary millennium with challenges over the as forward is Canada
 opportunities of a century is success the look with new the , extraordinary last the state with , at forward . back rightly , and new history As to new millennium and as certainty we we regarded beginning that challenges Canada over look world can Canadian of an
 certainty over challenges new of an the is , and state look new , with we the beginning forward millennium As world rightly at the can as century of back history we regarded last with Canadian opportunities new that . and to Canada extraordinary look success , a
 , Canadian last challenges forward can new beginning the at that , over and the is century with certainty look and extraordinary success , opportunities a new world back as to state we rightly we Canada history new the an millennium with of regarded look As . of
 of an and look challenges beginning world , success state is a rightly and to as new we back regarded last . extraordinary certainty , the with of look millennium with Canada century , the at forward opportunities that history the we can As new new over Canadian
 can century of millennium certainty beginning an we , new forward with a Canada regarded , last the history over back we . to the opportunities is and Canadian look state , rightly new challenges as and with As the world that look extraordinary new success at of
Their view was that they represented the broad consensus of parents and students as it applied to this amendment. 
All parents wanted a change to renovate the school system, and this was the best modality in which to do that.  
I agree with Senator Lynch-Staunton, Senator Wood and Senator Lavoie-Roux that this is not perfect. 
However, in addition to the evidence, we did refer to opinion polls that seemed to suggest a strong support for reform along these lines.  
Yes, the resolution is imperfect. 
We would like to have done it "our way," as Frank Sinatra used to say, but we must deal with the Province of Quebec in this case. 
We had to bend imperfect tools to see whether they fit our minimum requirements. 
In my view, they did not fit our minimum requirements; they fit our reasonable requirements for constitutional amendment.  
Senator Wood :
Is it not true in the letter from the bishops of Quebec - the letter the honourable senator read - that they were in favour of repealing section 93? 
They questioned linguistic rights and suggested that denominational guarantees established by 107 be maintained. 
There was a caveat there that my honourable friend forgot to read.  
Senator Grafstein :
I find myself in great difficulty defending Roman Catholic theology let alone letters from Roman Catholic archbishops. 
I will leave it to each senator to come to his or her own conclusion on the testimony and on the letters, which are appended to the report.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Honourable senators, Senator Grafstein is quite right in stating that reform is needed. 
Actually, reform is well under way in Quebec. 
The new system, it seems, will be in place for the next school year. 
New linguistic boards will be set up. 
 As we look forward to the beginning of a new millennium with new challenges and new opportunities , we can look back at the last century of history and state with certainty that Canada is rightly regarded , the world over , as an extraordinary success .
 history certainty the Canada last look a of , world new to look As of with and over regarded success rightly we , extraordinary and the forward opportunities back that is can state new challenges beginning as . century Canadian at with we millennium the , new
 and extraordinary opportunities beginning success we century look world is over back of to look the challenges of new Canadian history the state , a As Canada forward last as , millennium can new we new the certainty with , regarded rightly that at and . an
 is that last extraordinary world new challenges Canadian forward a with as of state certainty an rightly new back with regarded of millennium can , the , look to history the new As Canada beginning success we . opportunities the , over and and century look we
Canada represents a triumph of the human spirit, bringing together the best of what people can do.  
 triumph of . people human the represents Canada do can what spirit a together , bringing the of best
 best . Canada of what , the represents the triumph can bringing of together people spirit do human a
 what can triumph together Canada the of best people the a bringing do , spirit human . of represents
 best a represents human the of the , spirit . of what do triumph people can Canada bringing together
 the represents Canada together the best triumph can spirit of of human people bringing . do a what ,
 people spirit what , a triumph . best together Canada can of bringing do the of the human represents
 of triumph of what , can best the bringing human represents do the together people spirit a Canada .
 people the bringing Canada , together best of human a can what spirit . triumph do the of represents
 represents bringing of human , Canada together do the a . spirit can of the best what people triumph
 Canada of the can together best a represents do , what triumph bringing . people spirit human the of
 what the , together people the represents best triumph bringing of Canada . do human can spirit a of
 . Canada people what triumph human together do the can represents of of spirit bringing , a the best
 do people best can what of spirit of a , represents triumph Canada the human . bringing the together
 spirit can bringing what the of Canada together do , best human people triumph . a represents the of
 Canada of represents human triumph spirit the bringing people best the can of , together do what a .
 bringing triumph spirit of people a best of human . do the what , represents the together Canada can
It is not public money. 
No one is forced to invest in Royal Trust.  
Senator Gigantès :
The public is made up of individuals. 
These individuals are private persons. 
Under the proposed system, they would invest in something which may not make huge profits, but which will not experience the disasters of the private sector.  
Senator Bolduc :
It is a matter of choice. 
Senator Gigantès :
With a system such as the one proposed, one thing is for sure. 
There will be no Trevor Eyton to squander the money, there will be no Conrad Black or Olympia & York to take it away from you.  
Senator Bolduc :
I do not want to answer questions on specific cases, because I find it objectionable.  
Hon. Gerry St. Germain :
Honourable senators, the honourable senator who has just spoken brings a wealth of experience to this chamber. 
He was one of the top bureaucrats and one of the top men in the Quebec government at one time. 
He brings that experience to this forum.  
I would prefer to ask this question of the government side, but no one will speak further on it. 
Therefore, I will ask Senator Bolduc.  
This involves a question that I asked Senator Kirby yesterday. 
 Canada represents a triumph of the spirit , bringing together the best of what people can do .
 triumph represents can . spirit Canada the best bringing human the together do of a what people of
 represents Canada of of spirit best what . triumph a bringing together the people the can , human
 of Canada together do , human . what spirit the bringing the represents best triumph a people can
...For a New Century of Canadian Achievement 
 of a Canadian New Achievement ... Century For
 of a Century Achievement New Canadian ... For
 of a Canadian ... Century Achievement For New
 Achievement a Canadian For ... of New Century
 Century ... New Achievement a Canadian of For
 Achievement New Canadian For ... a of Century
 a Achievement New Canadian of ... Century For
 Century ... a Canadian For Achievement of New
 Achievement ... a New Century of Canadian For
 of Canadian Achievement ... New For Century a
 of Century Achievement Canadian a For ... New
 New ... Century Canadian of a For Achievement
 Canadian New Achievement a Century ... of For
 a ... For of Century Canadian New Achievement
 of Achievement Canadian For New ... Century a
 Achievement New a ... Century For of Canadian
We have seen this in Quebec. 
There must be strict rules to prevent this sort of thing, if we want to avoid regrettable misuse.  
The matter of the pension plan's objectives is basic. 
In this respect, the legislation must be clear. 
The board must first and foremost look after the interests of the contributors whose income security depends on its performance to a large extent.  
The history of the Quebec Caisse de dépôt et placement warrants examination in this regard. 
In the mid-1960s, at the time it was set up, Mr. Lesage, the Premier of Quebec at the time, described it as an instrument of social security. 
He added, at the instigation of some, that it would also be an instrument of economic development, with the result that, little by little, the managers who were not sufficiently dynamic in the eyes of the directors were replaced. 
It was not Mr. Caouette's money, it was real bucks. 
The second director was also an experienced investment fund manager, but the government changed in Quebec, and we ended up with people who were more dynamic and who wanted to direct the economy. 
That is when it was decided that the people running the Caisse were not dynamic enough and had to be replaced. 
That was done. 
That is how a deputy minister of finance came to be the president of the Caisse de dépôt et placement du Québec at a time when Finance Minister Parizeau was a very influential member of the Lévesque cabinet. 
This led Quebec industry leaders and other stakeholders to raise all sorts of questions about the policy and management of the Caisse under his direction.  
You know the arbitrary risks inherent in choosing the companies in which the board can invest. 
Of course, there are provisions to limit the ratio, but everyone knows that the percentage of shares required today to control a company is relatively small. 
Can you imagine what kind of arm-twisting this will lead to? 
To collectivize an operation is to politicize it. 
That is what we are doing here, notwithstanding the precaution taken to maintain the board members' independence from the government. 
Even if we are told that they will come from outside the government and operate at arm's length from the government, we must be realistic.  
 ... For a New Century Canadian Achievement
 Canadian ... Century New Achievement a For
 For ... New Canadian of Century Achievement
 Achievement Canadian Century a ... of New
As old and familiar constraints of time and distance are breaking down, individuals and communities can accomplish things once unimaginable.  
 unimaginable . accomplish are , and familiar once As breaking constraints and old communities things and distance individuals down of time can
 individuals are down accomplish As constraints , and once unimaginable communities breaking time can old things and of familiar distance and .
 and once distance time breaking accomplish down can . As individuals are communities and familiar unimaginable things old and , constraints of
 As , once time and and familiar and communities old constraints breaking things of unimaginable individuals down are accomplish . can distance
 communities time breaking As constraints down of and things old unimaginable once distance accomplish . are and familiar , can and individuals
 old distance can accomplish once and and individuals of . constraints communities down are time breaking familiar As , and things unimaginable
 and down time breaking once individuals old unimaginable of and are and , . As distance accomplish constraints can familiar things communities
 things communities and unimaginable constraints old can familiar once . , As breaking individuals are down of distance time and and accomplish
 familiar and are breaking unimaginable down once time old , distance and and accomplish constraints . can things As individuals of communities
 things are down accomplish unimaginable and familiar time and breaking communities once As constraints and , can . distance old of individuals
 constraints are down individuals distance time once old breaking , of can communities and and and . As unimaginable things accomplish familiar
 accomplish individuals down communities constraints breaking . familiar things are can and and and of time distance , old unimaginable once As
 communities once of As , constraints distance accomplish time and . and familiar and down individuals unimaginable are breaking things can old
 . and are down communities and of unimaginable breaking can time , accomplish constraints As and once old individuals things familiar distance
 accomplish communities and are of distance As , time unimaginable and once individuals old can constraints familiar breaking and . things down
 unimaginable distance and are As individuals and , old . once can accomplish familiar constraints and down things communities time of breaking
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Informetrica Study on Meeting Targets-Government Position 
Hon. Mira Spivak :
Honourable senators, late last week, the consulting firm Informetrica released a study entitled, "The Scale of the Challenge for Reducing Canadian Greenhouse Gas Emissions." 
This report states: 
We conclude that there is almost no chance of meeting this goal in Canada under any reasonable economic scenario...  
And I stress this last part: 
...given current commitments to action.  
Could the Leader of the Government tell us if the relevant ministers are aware of this study, whether there have been any responses, or what the reaction has been to this prestigious firm's study?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
It provides very important data. 
I am not sure the government would necessarily agree with the findings of the study but, certainly, those findings will be taken into consideration.  
Senator Spivak :
I am glad to hear that.  
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Concept of Differing Targets-Government Position 
Hon. Mira Spivak :
In the current discussions in Kyoto, the idea of tailoring reductions targets to individual countries' economic and social profiles rather than having a one-size-fits-all commitment has gained some currency, particularly in view of the most recent American proposal. 
Where does the Canadian delegation stand with respect to this concept?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government):
Honourable senators, the media is reporting, of course, on a possible deal on targets and time-tables which could see Canada accepting a reduction of 5 per cent from 1990 levels bythe year 2010. 
At this point, these reports are speculative, but negotiations are ongoing.  
 As old and familiar constraints of time and distance are breaking down , individuals and communities can accomplish things once .
 unimaginable down , things . distance constraints and once of As and can familiar communities breaking accomplish time old and individuals
 accomplish can old As distance down , of and and communities unimaginable . are once familiar and constraints individuals breaking time
 accomplish down and once breaking things familiar unimaginable constraints . old and time communities and are , distance individuals As can
Canada is ready. 
 is Canada ready .
 is . ready Canada
 ready is Canada .
 is . Canada ready
 . ready is Canada
 is Canada ready .
 . Canada ready is
 . ready Canada is
 Canada ready is .
 is Canada ready .
 Canada ready is .
 . Canada ready is
 Canada . ready is
 ready Canada . is
 Canada . is ready
 ready . Canada is
"We will take your money and provide you with a pension," they said. 
As soon as they got their grubby hands on the cash, it was lent to the provinces at favourable interest rates. 
They were cheating Canadians who trusted that when they got old, they would have a pension. 
Baby boomers, who have paid all their working lives since the program's inception, now have the audacity to reach 50. 
We have had the audacity to reach 50!  
Senator Cools :
Not me.  
Senator Tkachuk :
Then they had the gall to limit their breeding, thus causing a situation whereby, 15 years from now, there will be fewer people working to pay for the people who turn 65 at that time. 
They limited their breeding. 
From what we know of social behaviour during the 1970s, abstinence was not the order of the day. 
People were, shall I say, "fuddling". 
It was not their fault; it was the fault of scientists. 
The cause, they say, was social behaviour. 
That is what caused the end of this pension plan. 
It is one other social plan gone astray. 
The good old days are gone.  
We have another problem. 
People live longer. 
Again, science has interfered with a social plan. 
 Canada is ready
 . ready Canada
 ready is Canada
 Canada ready is
We are poised for success. 
 success . for are poised We
 success We poised for are .
 . for poised success We are
 success are poised for We .
 . for success poised are We
 for success poised are . We
 . poised for We success are
 . poised success for We are
 . success for We are poised
 poised for are We success .
 We . for are poised success
 . We are for success poised
 are poised We success . for
 success poised for . are We
 success . We are for poised
 are success poised We for .
Read the transcript. 
If there is a dispute about evidence, rather than taking my word or that of the honourable senator opposite - with whom I do disagree - senators should read the transcript. 
The transcript will speak for itself.  
Senator Lavoie-Roux :
I think all senators would have wanted to read the transcript, but we did not have enough time.  
The minister appeared before the committee on November 4. I asked him if he felt that minorities would be as well protected by section 23 of the Charter as they were by section 93 of the Constitution, and he said that they would not be as well protected.  
Senator Grafstein :
He and I have a different viewpoint on section 23(1)( a ) of the Charter.  
Hon. Dalia Wood :
Honourable senators, I have a question for the honourable senator.  
I do not agree with the concept of my honourable friend's consensus. 
Le Fédération des comités des parents de la province de Québec is a group mandated by the National Assembly to represent all parents and all schools in Quebec. 
They appeared before the committee. 
The president, Mr. Gary Stronach, when asked if the membership was aware, stated - and this is in his letter - that he did not ask his membership for their views. 
He said that he did not ask the parents whether they were for or against the amendment to section 93.  
This is one of the largest groups in Quebec. 
If Mr. Stronach is part of the "for" or "against" theory, then there is a problem with the whole concept put forth by my honourable friend.  
My honourable friend spoke of the Estates General, but he did not refer to their minority report, which covered over 70 per cent of their membership. 
Why are my figures different from those of my honourable friend?  
Senator Grafstein :
 We are for success .
 . are for poised We
 for We . are poised
 for poised . are success
Our citizens have the qualities that are needed to succeed in the21st century: 
 qualities in century are have : the21st succeed the Our needed that to citizens
 needed citizens to : are succeed in century Our the21st the qualities have that
 century that needed are in qualities the succeed to the21st citizens Our have :
 are in have needed the succeed century the21st Our to qualities that citizens :
 have that : citizens to succeed the21st needed qualities Our century the are in
 the21st citizens century Our qualities : succeed are that needed the have to in
 the have to Our are that century succeed citizens in qualities the21st needed :
 are qualities that century to in have the21st : Our the succeed needed citizens
 are in : qualities to century Our have needed citizens that the21st succeed the
 : century citizens Our have needed that qualities to in the succeed are the21st
 citizens have to the21st succeed the : in that Our qualities are century needed
 succeed citizens that the Our to have the21st are century : needed in qualities
 have the to : that the21st succeed needed are Our century in qualities citizens
 century Our succeed needed that in have the21st qualities : are citizens to the
 succeed to citizens qualities have the21st needed century in are : that the Our
 to that Our : citizens are in needed succeed century the21st the qualities have
On that basis, I do not think leave is necessary.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is leave granted?  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
He just felt it was not necessary.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Leave is granted.  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is it your pleasure, honourable senators, to adopt the motion?  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
Motion agreed to.  
The Senate 
Conduct of Business-Notice of Inquiry 
Hon. William M. Kelly :
Honourable senators, I give notice: 
That on Thursday next, December 11, 1997, I will call the attention of the Senate to the way in which the Senate conducts its business.  
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Our citizens have the qualities that needed to succeed in the21st century :
 century have citizens Our are needed that to the : succeed the21st in
 to succeed citizens are qualities the that Our : the21st century in needed
 have Our are that the21st in qualities : succeed the needed century citizens
We have the values of sharing and mutual help.  
 have of and the sharing help mutual . We values
 . sharing of help the We values and have mutual
 mutual of . and the have sharing We values help
 help of and values We the have mutual sharing .
 We the values sharing help mutual and of have .
 We have the and sharing mutual of . values help
 and . have mutual the We sharing of help values
 values help have the sharing We mutual and . of
 We help . and have the mutual values of sharing
 of and values sharing the We have help . mutual
 . mutual the have We help sharing and of values
 mutual the of values sharing and help . We have
 . sharing values and of have We mutual the help
 mutual and . have help of the We values sharing
 . the help values mutual and We have sharing of
 We have values the sharing . mutual help and of
For those people who are in the middle and who will soon be retiring, it is not a big problem for them. 
They will have some reduced benefits and some increased costs. 
To those people who have been paying all their lives - that is, all the baby boomers who will begin to turn 50 - they will receive benefits and be faced with another 15 years of increased costs.  
I will tell you for whom this is important. 
I have a daughter who is 24 and a son who is 21. 
Many of you have children and grandchildren. 
The government is asking them to pay 9.9 per cent - I am sure it is 9.9 per cent because the minister wanted the number to be under the figure 10. That represents 10 per cent of their income, and it will increase with inflation. 
The $35,000 that they pay on today will inevitably be more tomorrow.  
As inflation eats away at it and the numbers rise, that number remains the same. 
This goes against everything we have ever done on this program since its inception in 1966. 
It stays the same. 
In 10 or 15 years, that $3,500 will be worth $1,500, $1,000, $500, depending on what government does and what happens to inflation.  
Senator Taylor :
Elect the Liberals and it will be high!  
Senator Tkachuk :
If we elect the Liberals, inflation will be high? 
We already know that! 
Let me continue in that vein. 
Perhaps honourable senators opposite do not want to hear what Paul Martin will be doing, and the explaining that you will have to do back home in 10 or 15 years when your children ask you what you did about this bill. 
When they retire, their CPP benefits will be worth about what they put in, plus 2.5 per cent.  
 have the values of sharing and mutual help .
 values sharing have help . mutual of the We
 help and . We values have mutual the sharing
 have mutual values the of and help sharing .
We are well educated.  
 We are educated . well
 are . well We educated
 educated well We . are
 well educated . are We
 are well We . educated
 well We educated . are
 We educated . well are
 . We well are educated
 We are well . educated
 . educated are We well
 We well . are educated
 well We are . educated
 educated are well . We
 . well are educated We
 . well educated are We
 . are educated We well
Despite the crisis with the Mexican peso, which involves their next door neighbour, their equity market survived, and is, in fact, doing well. 
Investors are getting good returns.  
Two lessons are to be learned from that. 
First, a communication plan on the part of the government can sell a fund that is fundamentally sound; and, second, a private pension plan can work.  
Honourable senators, we will have a private pension plan in this country within 10 years, because those "generation X" kids will demand it from us. 
The "excess generation," as the article calls you and I, will have no say in the matter.  
My fundamental point is that there must be a communications plan.  
This bill is seen by many people across the country as nothing more than another tax grab by the Liberal government, a tax grab in the range of $100 billion. 
Imagine bringing in a bill of such magnitude without giving Canadians the opportunity to have input into such dramatic changes to their retirement system as we know it, changes which will dramatically change the three pillars of our pension system, OAS, GIS, and the Canada Pension Plan.  
As I noted in a question to the Leader of the Government in the Senate on October 30: 
My question pertains not to the proposed changes to the Canada Pension Plan but to the government's efforts to sell those changes to Canadians. 
Can the minister report on what the government has spent and what will be spent in the future for communications concerning the Canada Pension Plan, including polling, focus groups, communications, advice and strategy and advertising?  
Other than the simple response that there was a 1-800 number that people could call, I received no response. 
That is what the government determines is a sufficient communications plan for Canadians to understand what the heck is going on. 
That is a travesty. 
That, to me, is not responsible government whatsoever. 
Can you imagine a prime minister who said that he is a man of the people, a man who is determined to change the way government is done, now ramming through the most dramatic changes to our pension system without informing the Canadian public of just what the government is proposing and allowing input from them?  
Honourable senators, I refer to questions raised in this place over the last several months, questions that relate to the ever-increasing taxes that this government is imposing on the lives of all working Canadians. 
For example, on October 1, Senator Michael Meighen asked the following: 
My question relates to employment insurance premiums. 
 We well educated .
 We educated well .
 . educated are well
 We are . educated
We welcome innovation and new ideas.  
 welcome We . new ideas and innovation
 . innovation and ideas new We welcome
 innovation new welcome and . ideas We
 We and ideas welcome new innovation .
 . new We innovation ideas and welcome
 innovation welcome new and ideas We .
 and new ideas . welcome We innovation
 welcome . ideas We innovation and new
 . ideas new We welcome and innovation
 innovation new We ideas and welcome .
 ideas . We welcome and innovation new
 new welcome . innovation ideas and We
 We . and new ideas innovation welcome
 welcome . and ideas new We innovation
 innovation . and We ideas new welcome
 welcome ideas We and new innovation .
It was mentioned repeatedly that, as a result of the Supreme Court decisions, it has become obvious that the rights that are positively guaranteed under section 93 are not as broad as they were originally assumed to be. 
However, we do not believe that the amendment was justified because the denominational education rights guaranteed under section 93 were nothing more than empty shells. 
Had we been satisfied that the majority of Catholics or Protestants in Quebec were opposed to the amendment, it would not have mattered whether or not their rights carried much weight. 
I think that Senator Lavoie-Roux was quite right in saying that minorities often require special protection to be free to exercise their rights. 
But it is possible to limit or remove this special protection with the consent of a majority of this minority.  
It was then a matter of figuring out why a majority of members of these two groups were prepared to relinquish these privileges. 
It is important to point out that representatives of all the groups involved were consulted.  
Be that as it may, honourable senators, this amendment will not spell the end of denominational, be it Catholic or Protestant, education in Quebec. 
The Education Act of this province gives parents the right to choose between Catholic or Protestant denominational education for their children. 
It will be up to parents to decide whether publicly funded denominational education should be maintained indefinitely. 
The fact that the notwithstanding clause was used by the Government of Quebec to protect the existing education legislation seems to indicate, however, that the government reacted favourably to the wish expressed by some parents to maintain Protestant and Catholic denominational schools. 
We have every reason to believe that the place of religion in public education will be subject to a full, open and democratic debate and that the parents' choice will continue to prevail, as it has for so long outside Montreal and Quebec City.  
Throughout the debate that took place before the special joint committee and in this House, we considered the fact that subsection 23(1) of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms does not apply to Quebec and the issue of whether the amendment to section 93 would prejudice the educational rights of native Quebecers. 
Section 23 of the Charter and section 93 of the Constitution Act of 1867 concern educational rights and, instinctively, we might think they are closely linked. 
However, they are not constitutionally related and, in any case it seems entirely ill-advised to reduce consent for constitutional change to a mere transaction where one right serves as a bargaining chip for the improvement of another.  
Honourable senators, I strongly urge you to support this resolution. 
Although we noted there was a consensus to amend section 93, we felt the real issue was the quality of the education of children in Quebec, and on that point opinion was unanimous.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Senator Robichaud, allow me to correct an impression that you left and to ask you a question. 
However, I wanted to make this correction, because you referred to the "government in place", when in fact it was the Liberal government of the day that made the decision, over the objections of the Parti Québécois then in opposition.  
 We welcome and new ideas .
 innovation new and We welcome ideas
 ideas welcome We innovation new and
 innovation We and ideas . welcome
We are an open and democratic society.  
 . an democratic and We open are society
 an open society . We democratic and are
 and society an We open are democratic .
 are democratic We and an society . open
 are an society open and We democratic .
 society open and an are We democratic .
 open and an democratic We . society are
 an are democratic open and . We society
 . and democratic are We open an society
 . an society are We democratic open and
 democratic open society . an are We and
 an society . democratic We and are open
 an . open democratic and are We society
 . and We society democratic are an open
 democratic . and are We society open an
 an and We society democratic open are .
In a paper released the week prior to November 25, the Association of Canadian Pension Management said that the Seniors Benefit will stifle savings. 
To quote from their paper: 
Middle-income Canadians might simply decide to supplement government programs through the accumulation of non-income producing capital, such as homes or interest-free mortgages for their children. 
They may simply avoid retirement savings plans that generate heavily taxed income...  
They go on to suggest that Ottawa structure the Seniors Benefit in such a way that it will not result in an effective tax rate in excess of 50 per cent.  
Was the government listening when I asked that question? 
Senator Graham said, "Of course, yes." 
Did the Leader of the Government in the Senate read The Financial Post editorial that morning in which it was recommended that this problem be changed to reflect such an issue? 
From what I understand, in the other place all amendments have been struck down and no further amendments are coming forward. 
As we know, no amendments were passed.  
Changes to pension legislation represents one of the largest issues facing seniors as they move into retirement. 
Seniors, as a whole, do not know about these changes. 
Has the government developed a communications plan to inform Canadians of this issue prior to the passage of this bill? 
To that inquiry, Senator Graham replied, "Yes." 
He also said that this was a matter to which I had referred before, and that there are 1-800 lines available. 
He said that that was the communication plan on the part of the government.  
The crux of this whole taxation matter came about on November 26, when I asked the following question of the Leader of the Government in the Senate: 
On October 1 of this year, Senator Meighen asked a question concerning employment insurance. 
On October 23, I asked a further question, referring to my colleague's earlier question. 
I received a response yesterday to my question, and I wish to read it into the record. 
 We are open and democratic society .
 . democratic are open and an society
 democratic open . We an society are
 society We open and democratic are an
We are a bilingual and multicultural country at a time of increasing globalization.  
 bilingual globalization and a time at We are a country of . multicultural increasing
 increasing and country a multicultural . time globalization at bilingual are a of We
 and globalization multicultural We of country are . at a a time increasing bilingual
 globalization and a time We increasing of are at multicultural . bilingual a country
 and . globalization multicultural a of at a bilingual are time increasing country We
 a bilingual increasing We at are and globalization a time . country multicultural of
 increasing at are time bilingual We globalization a and multicultural . a of country
 country and time a are a We of at multicultural increasing globalization bilingual .
 bilingual are multicultural globalization of country and . We time at a increasing a
 a of time at multicultural . and bilingual a We globalization are country increasing
 bilingual and a . at We are multicultural country time a of globalization increasing
 country of a are time . a bilingual at We and increasing multicultural globalization
 country a are at of and . increasing multicultural bilingual a We time globalization
 multicultural a globalization at We a are . country increasing of and bilingual time
 We time multicultural are a at globalization of and a country increasing . bilingual
 are multicultural a of increasing a country and globalization time at . We bilingual
The ongoing challenge was to reconcile linguistic school boards with the constitutional guarantee protecting Catholic and Protestant school boards in Montreal and Quebec City. 
Even though the Supreme Court approved the system contemplated in Bill 107, the theoretical coexistence of linguistic and denominational school boards proved impracticable.  
Obviously, it is primarily in Montreal that it appears most difficult to set up linguistic school boards without having to support an overlap and interpenetration of structures. 
Lorraine Pagé, of the Centrale de l'enseignement du Québec, testified before the committee that, in Montreal: 
...we would have a francophone school board that would include a Catholic sector, a Protestant sector, and another sector; we would also have an anglophone school board which would have a Catholic sector, a Protestant sector and another sector, and in addition to that there would be a Catholic school board - there are so many it gets confusing - where services would have to be offered to francophones and anglophones, and another school board for Protestants, where services would be offered to francophones and anglophones.  
This means that there would be at least four mandatory and separate school boards, including two with three mandatory sectors each and two others with two mandatory sectors each. 
As the witness said, there would be a superimposition of organizational structures. 
The same thing would happen in Quebec City. 
This would create unnecessary costs and complications in the annual registration of students, the assignment of personnel, the distribution of resources and the establishment of voters' lists.  
Some of the witnesses who appeared before the special joint committee seem to think that the debate on education that has been going on for over 30 years in Quebec is not only about freeing the Government of Quebec of the restrictions resulting from paragraphs (1) to (4) of section 93. 
But even if that were the case, in the five extensive public consultations carried out over the past five years, the reform of public education in Quebec was the major issue - and it is the organizational structures guaranteed by section 93 which obviously are impeding this reform. 
This very public debate necessarily raised the question of whether the Constitution should be amended to solve this problem.  
After hearing the witnesses, the committee was satisfied that a majority of Catholic and Protestant parents - the two groups concerned - supported the amendment to section 93.  
One aspect of the issue that was frequently mentioned is the Quebec National Assembly's unanimous support of Bill 109 and the amendment to section 93. 
Such unanimous votes are significant, but they do not mean there is a consensus in the Catholic and Protestant communities, whose privileges are at stake. 
Such unanimity in the Quebec National Assembly proves nevertheless that support for the amendment transcends party lines. 
The PQ government was reluctant to propose that amendment, because it involved using the amending formula provided for in the Constitution Act of 1982, which that government refuses to recognize. 
The government finally yielded to the pressures from Liberal opposition members.  
Some people were concerned that the debate on national unity might detract from the substance of the amendment. 
If the only concern of the special joint committee had been to prove that "federalism works," it would not have insisted on hearing this evidence showing that there was a consensus among Catholic and Protestant parents. 
 We are a bilingual and country at a time of increasing globalization .
 globalization bilingual increasing multicultural time We a a at of country . and
 a a bilingual and increasing We of . multicultural are at globalization time
 multicultural of country We a increasing a and bilingual at time globalization .
We have learned to accommodate our differences and diversity and turn them into strengths.  
 diversity learned into accommodate to and and . strengths differences have We our turn them
 turn learned diversity have We our accommodate . and them strengths and into differences to
 have strengths accommodate diversity learned and to . our turn We into them and differences
 and diversity . learned and them have our turn into differences accommodate to strengths We
 and into turn and We accommodate have them diversity our to strengths differences . learned
 have We accommodate into strengths . our turn learned and differences and diversity them to
 . our strengths accommodate have and diversity into We them turn differences learned and to
 and We diversity our into and turn to have strengths differences . them learned accommodate
 have them differences We diversity learned and turn into our . strengths to accommodate and
 strengths We learned accommodate to differences into and have our . diversity them and turn
 into strengths and our to . learned turn and accommodate differences diversity them have We
 and learned our differences diversity turn to We accommodate and them . into have strengths
 learned and . accommodate to turn have strengths We and them our differences into diversity
 We to them strengths our have and into . learned diversity turn accommodate differences and
 . accommodate them our differences to into and strengths diversity We turn have and learned
 them to learned strengths have our into and differences turn We . accommodate and diversity
Some witnesses had only a few hours' notice that they would be appearing before the committee, and their presentations suffered as a result, as they said themselves.  
Under such conditions, it was quite normal that participation in the committee could have been interpreted as sanctioning the conditions imposed by and for the government. 
However, this was an issue that was worth risking this false interpretation, because the Parliament of Canada is dealing with a request from the Quebec National Assembly, with its sovereignist majority, to exempt Quebec from certain constitutional obligations it has had to live with for 130 years.  
Unfortunately, there was not enough time to involve the committee in preparatory briefings in order for it to have as complete an appreciation and understanding as possible of all the implications of Quebec's resolution. 
As a result, it tended to stray from the substance of the reference before it. 
"Religious education," "religious instruction," "denominational schools," "confessional schools," "linguistic rights," "minority rights" and other terms were used so often that they tended to become interchangeable to the point that they occasionally melded together.  
Section 93 was a result of a compromise at a time when two religious beliefs dominated everyday life in Canada to an extent hard to describe today when even one's most difficult moral decisions are usually self-determined, rather than imposed without question by a recognized higher authority. 
In 1867, Catholics and Protestants were guaranteed certain privileges which were not even considered for other religious denominations. 
Their numbers and influences were such that the idea that a section 93 was nothing else but a deserved right did not even arise.  
In the early 1980s, when a Canadian constitution was being debated, section 93 remained as it was written in 1867, despite the fact that Canadian society had evolved to the point where the debate we are now having should have been held then. 
Even more to the point, the authors of the Constitution Act recognized that section 93's limitations to two privileged Christian beliefs would conflict with the Charter's anti-discrimination implications, so much so that section 93 was provided immunity from the Charter in section 29. 
Indeed, section 29 could not be clearer. 
It reads as follows: 
Nothing in this Charter abrogates or derogates from any rights or privileges guaranteed by or under the Constitution of Canada in respect of denominational, separate or dissentient schools.  
Why the issue of confessional schools as well as other issues crying out for change, such as Senate reform, were left untouched during the long debate before and during patriation and surrounding the Constitution Act itself is for those who were there at the time to explain. 
Certainly a golden opportunity was lost to give Canada a basic law more in tune with modern Canadian society, except for the adoption of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 
Even it is not without its flaws, not the least being the notwithstanding clause which can be subjected to abuse. 
Perhaps all of this is a reflection of the one constant which has marked Canada since its origins, a country identified by its extraordinary political and social diversity and contradictions.  
In any event, we are faced with a request from the Quebec National Assembly to be removed from the obligations to maintain formal Catholic and Protestant school structures in the cities of Montreal and Quebec City and to maintain minority or dissentient Catholic and Protestant schools outside those areas at the request of minority Catholic or Protestant parents, as the case may be. 
Provincial legislation to establish linguistic schools is already being put into effect. 
 We have learned to accommodate our differences and diversity and turn them into strengths
 to our into strengths them turn . learned have We and diversity accommodate and
 them turn have accommodate strengths We to . learned and differences our diversity and
 diversity into them have . to and differences our We accommodate learned turn and
Our federation makes the most of these talents. 
 federation talents of makes Our the these most .
 talents most these the Our . federation makes of
 . makes Our of federation these most the talents
 these most makes the . Our federation of talents
 federation of talents the makes most . these Our
 federation the makes most these talents of Our .
 of Our makes these talents federation the most .
 of federation the these Our most talents makes .
 most the of makes talents . these Our federation
 makes of these most Our talents federation the .
 these talents the of . makes federation Our most
 most of the talents federation . makes these Our
 most of talents federation these makes the Our .
 the Our . makes these talents federation of most
 the . Our most makes talents these federation of
 most Our talents makes . these the federation of
Senator Grafstein :
Again, honourable senators, there are two solitudes here. 
I believe that education, in pith and substance, is a provincial matter.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
That is not the question.  
Senator Grafstein :
That is what the Constitution says.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
I do not disagree.  
Senator Grafstein :
That is what section 93 says.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
No, section 93 does not say that.  
Senator Grafstein :
The Province of Quebec, by its lawfully elected assembly, has requested a resolution amending the Constitution. 
How can I ask them to respect the Constitution if I do not respect the Constitution? 
I respect the Constitution.  
Honourable senators, this is a lawful request done in a lawful way. 
Perhaps certain words are egregious, but it is done in a lawful way, and I am prepared to support them. 
To my mind, the fact that they are prepared to proceed with their reforms before we legislate in any way, shape or form is their business; it is not my business. 
 Our federation makes the most of talents .
 federation most of . these Our talents the
 most these . the federation Our talents of
 makes talents Our the federation of most these
It gives us the cohesion we need to multiply our strengths by combining our talents, by pooling our resources and by sharing risks. 
 our by , by our cohesion we gives the resources need talents pooling by . and multiply us to It strengths risks sharing our combining
 to our It , strengths cohesion sharing by talents our combining our pooling gives resources need . risks multiply us and by by the we
 we talents resources to our It by pooling cohesion . strengths risks our , by the sharing and by multiply need combining us gives our
 combining pooling strengths sharing by and by to our resources talents cohesion need . we It multiply , us by the our risks gives our
 by by . strengths our combining , cohesion us sharing by the to we our talents and resources multiply gives risks our need pooling It
 risks the . to us need , sharing It strengths multiply our talents cohesion by and we gives resources by pooling combining our by our
 combining , cohesion . gives us need our to talents sharing multiply risks strengths by our resources by our pooling by we the and It
 by It . cohesion by pooling our resources gives and strengths us multiply sharing , talents by to combining risks our the need we our
 our we talents by . us cohesion It by risks to our the multiply our gives need by pooling , sharing strengths and resources combining
 by need by us to cohesion gives combining It our by . risks resources the our pooling sharing our talents strengths and multiply , we
 to our , need cohesion and by multiply we strengths us sharing combining . our by our talents the gives It resources risks by pooling
 by to our talents us resources our we pooling strengths risks our the multiply , It sharing combining and . gives by by cohesion need
 our risks our and multiply . talents our , cohesion us by It to sharing strengths combining gives pooling by need by we resources the
 need and sharing combining us to our It risks , our cohesion gives . we by by strengths by multiply talents resources pooling our the
 by combining by risks pooling our strengths cohesion we us multiply gives the our sharing need to talents It and resources our by . ,
 risks . combining , resources It us gives we need sharing by pooling by our strengths the cohesion talents multiply and to our our by
I think all senators would have wanted to read the transcript, but we did not have enough time.  
The minister appeared before the committee on November 4. I asked him if he felt that minorities would be as well protected by section 23 of the Charter as they were by section 93 of the Constitution, and he said that they would not be as well protected.  
Senator Grafstein :
He and I have a different viewpoint on section 23(1)( a ) of the Charter.  
Hon. Dalia Wood :
Honourable senators, I have a question for the honourable senator.  
I do not agree with the concept of my honourable friend's consensus. 
Le Fédération des comités des parents de la province de Québec is a group mandated by the National Assembly to represent all parents and all schools in Quebec. 
They appeared before the committee. 
The president, Mr. Gary Stronach, when asked if the membership was aware, stated - and this is in his letter - that he did not ask his membership for their views. 
He said that he did not ask the parents whether they were for or against the amendment to section 93.  
This is one of the largest groups in Quebec. 
If Mr. Stronach is part of the "for" or "against" theory, then there is a problem with the whole concept put forth by my honourable friend.  
My honourable friend spoke of the Estates General, but he did not refer to their minority report, which covered over 70 per cent of their membership. 
Why are my figures different from those of my honourable friend?  
Senator Grafstein :
Again, honourable senators, this is a question of evidence. 
I refer all senators to the transcript.  
I wish to speak specifically about the fact that we are dealing with elites as opposed to the groups they represent. 
We questioned these representatives during the hearings as to whether their underlying groups agreed with the position they had taken.  
 It gives us the cohesion we need to multiply our strengths by combining our talents , by our resources and by sharing risks .
 resources our we talents combining need by It multiply gives cohesion and pooling . sharing our our risks by by us the , strengths
 . our the risks our and talents cohesion strengths our by to combining by It pooling , sharing multiply by need we resources gives
 cohesion our It , resources us by our sharing . risks multiply gives to and pooling by combining by need our strengths we talents
It also gives us the flexibility we need to experiment and innovate in order to succeed in a rapidly changing world.  
 It to . the experiment succeed in changing gives we need in innovate world a flexibility also order rapidly us to and
 us flexibility in gives experiment rapidly we a succeed in need world to to . order It also and changing innovate the
 to gives to . It also order we flexibility a the world us succeed rapidly changing experiment need in in and innovate
 rapidly flexibility in . us also in need changing innovate to world to a succeed It we order the and gives experiment
 we changing innovate the experiment It in world flexibility to us a rapidly succeed . need also and gives order to in
 to and in . rapidly order flexibility succeed world a need in innovate It us to also experiment we changing the gives
 and innovate gives order need also world rapidly we in flexibility to It to succeed the us in a changing . experiment
 changing and a succeed It the order innovate world we us rapidly flexibility in . in gives to experiment also need to
 order . to need in gives world It innovate the rapidly succeed flexibility and we in changing a also us experiment to
 world experiment innovate It gives and the rapidly to in order need a changing to us . also succeed we flexibility in
 we and flexibility . us to world to changing a in in also gives innovate need rapidly experiment It order succeed the
 experiment It to and flexibility rapidly . world order us changing succeed to a in we in the also innovate need gives
 experiment It order need succeed flexibility in . innovate in to also to changing we and the a us gives rapidly world
 succeed to in gives order and flexibility rapidly need the a also changing innovate we in us experiment It to . world
 order gives in succeed us rapidly changing in a innovate the flexibility It and need we world . experiment to also to
 and flexibility rapidly we gives the world to also changing experiment a us need to It order in . innovate succeed in
Senator Grafstein :
Honourable senators, there is constitutional law. 
Quebec wants to proceed by the rule of law. 
They are seeking to renovate their system under the rule of law and the Constitution.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
That is not my question.  
Senator Grafstein :
I assume that if they choose to proceed, they can. 
However, why should we in the Senate allow any province to proceed in a way that we consider unlawful? 
If there is an amendment to the Constitution, each senator in his or her heart and mind, after reviewing the testimony, must come to a conclusion. 
He or she can either vote for, against or abstain from the vote on the resolution.  
They want to be under the law, as does the Province of Newfoundland. 
They want to be under the Constitution. 
If they meet the standards of a constitutional change, I, for one, will support them, notwithstanding the fact that I mistrust their motivation and mistrust what they say. 
However, on matter of dealing with the rule of law, I am bound by the rule of law.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
My question has nothing to do with that answer. 
It was renewed in 1982 and given protection from the Charter. 
Quebec has finally adopted a linguistic school system that looks very promising and can be implemented without section 93 being amended, unlike Newfoundland, which needs an amendment to Term 17 to be able to implement a non-denominational system. 
The two resolutions are completely different in content and intent.  
 It also gives us the flexibility we need to experiment and innovate in order to succeed in a rapidly world .
 in changing innovate to also and . It to in order a rapidly flexibility need succeed us gives the experiment we
 in order to innovate the and succeed also to rapidly us . flexibility experiment world a gives in we need changing
 to a in experiment order need and the innovate succeed . gives changing It also to flexibility we in us rapidly
The Government wishes to recognize the important role of a professional, non-partisan public service in a well-performing civil society. 
 performing service - the civil of - public in Government to wishes role well recognize , partisan . society The non professional a a important
 wishes of service to - . non well - the a in performing role The public society Government important recognize a partisan civil professional ,
 well wishes service important Government the - society role civil to in a , of public recognize - a . performing non partisan professional The
 non important role , in civil service well partisan of Government the professional - to public a recognize The wishes society a - performing .
 to the , well society public in . The - a recognize partisan important role performing civil wishes - professional service of Government non a
 partisan important to . of public recognize performing role a a well Government service The professional civil the - society - wishes non , in
 service society the well , civil to role in public non . wishes a - important of recognize partisan The Government performing - professional a
 a - a service Government wishes the non civil society public performing professional partisan , to - The recognize well in role important of .
 in Government - important the , recognize non . well to civil partisan performing public of a - The professional service society wishes a role
 The civil - - wishes Government partisan a non the performing professional important . of society public , a service to in well recognize role
 - society non recognize service a important - performing professional partisan . civil , in Government of wishes The the role a well to public
 public - role recognize society . the a wishes , performing Government well to civil partisan service The in a of - professional important non
 Government the The public professional wishes well a to non role of important in performing . recognize service a - civil - partisan , society
 . The well public professional recognize partisan wishes - performing a non in , role of to important service Government the a civil society -
 civil well society in role - recognize performing of Government a the partisan professional , service . non - important a wishes public The to
 a non The , Government service professional partisan performing wishes a - to civil the public important role . well in recognize society - of
Honourable senators, the honourable senator who has just spoken brings a wealth of experience to this chamber. 
He was one of the top bureaucrats and one of the top men in the Quebec government at one time. 
He brings that experience to this forum.  
I would prefer to ask this question of the government side, but no one will speak further on it. 
Therefore, I will ask Senator Bolduc.  
This involves a question that I asked Senator Kirby yesterday. 
It is a question of accountability. 
In theory, it is possible that this fund will become larger than the entire budget of the federal government in the years to come. 
Yet we are placing it in the hands of 12 people.  
Does the Honourable Senator Bolduc concur, as Senator Kirby did, that there should be some scrutiny by Senate and House of Commons committees whereby these 12 people who will be sitting on this board will be under a certain amount of scrutiny before they are placed in this lofty, powerful, very responsible position?  
Senator Bolduc :
Honourable senators, that is a very good question. 
There is one thing in the bill that is very acceptable. 
The Auditor General will be able to look at the management of the Investment Board.  
As a result, there will be some accountability in the form of an audit. 
According to Mr. Massé's report, there are 85 to 90 different government organizations. 
This is all very interesting, but none of them will have as much money as the one we are talking about. 
We are talking about an annual amount on the order of 15 per cent to 20 per cent of Canada's gross national product. 
It is an enormous amount. 
I therefore think there has to be some sort of accountability, and one of the ways to achieve that is for parliamentarians to be involved in drafting the Auditor General's report; in my view, there should be an amendment along these lines, to guarantee that that is the case.  
 The Government wishes to recognize the important role of a professional , non - partisan public service in a - performing civil society .
 professional a of recognize role the - - The a Government in public service to important well non . wishes performing partisan civil society
 , professional wishes performing partisan society role Government civil The in to the . non - recognize important - a public a of well
 a of well non - recognize partisan , to Government The performing . service professional public - in civil important wishes a society role
Canada is served well by its public service, and the effort and dedication it exhibits in meeting the needs of citizens and in building partnerships among governments and other sectors of society. 
 and its and it society Canada in service building served the is among citizens meeting , needs in of dedication partnerships and of by sectors the well . governments exhibits and other effort public
 in it public by meeting of and is and other service partnerships society dedication building in Canada . , effort served its needs the exhibits among the well sectors of and governments citizens and
 and sectors served in of other exhibits and well effort its citizens is meeting dedication governments partnerships service the building in , the . society of Canada public and among needs by and it
 exhibits building other the is , and public by governments of among served service partnerships well in . the it citizens needs of effort dedication and and and meeting in sectors Canada its society
 among of service building served and meeting . citizens sectors its effort governments it , in in by is the of public and and exhibits needs dedication society the partnerships and well Canada other
 the dedication citizens and of is meeting sectors service and building and it public , in governments exhibits partnerships by effort among and its in other well society . the needs served Canada of
 needs in dedication is Canada its society service by the building the of , and of public and served and governments citizens effort exhibits it . in and partnerships well other sectors among meeting
 of in Canada by partnerships well and the public exhibits needs , governments and other . its society effort the and service among served dedication citizens it is meeting sectors of in and building
 is and partnerships among the exhibits , of and and by in other it Canada well building served public dedication the of service meeting citizens governments . and sectors in society its needs effort
 well building service the public . in of is society exhibits citizens governments the effort needs and and other its Canada in of and among and sectors by dedication , partnerships served it meeting
 it dedication other service . society served effort Canada needs by among partnerships of building and of public is the governments citizens meeting the well its sectors and in and exhibits , and in
 of building . well governments and other served society of the is needs and by citizens in sectors public Canada dedication among it meeting in and and service partnerships the effort , its exhibits
 and , it public in governments sectors needs Canada exhibits meeting of partnerships effort is well served dedication other its building society the and among . and the and citizens by service of in
 exhibits partnerships served and dedication in is . the of among it other effort by citizens public building service the well in sectors society of and Canada and governments and meeting its , needs
 the and by it effort exhibits well in in of and public Canada and other service served building needs among sectors and its the partnerships is . citizens meeting of society dedication , governments
 Canada sectors partnerships is and of effort society among . it exhibits citizens service well meeting in building and dedication its the and in other the governments public , needs by of served and
On that basis, I do not think leave is necessary.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is leave granted?  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
He just felt it was not necessary.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Leave is granted.  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is it your pleasure, honourable senators, to adopt the motion?  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
Motion agreed to.  
The Senate 
Conduct of Business-Notice of Inquiry 
Hon. William M. Kelly :
Honourable senators, I give notice: 
That on Thursday next, December 11, 1997, I will call the attention of the Senate to the way in which the Senate conducts its business.  
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Canada is served by its public service , and the effort and dedication it exhibits in meeting the needs of citizens and in building partnerships among governments and other sectors of society .
 citizens needs in building its of is , among sectors Canada society by served other and public the the of partnerships and effort and dedication and . governments in meeting exhibits service well
 exhibits dedication partnerships is meeting effort and of needs of citizens building and its society well public and , it the in sectors Canada in served and among the by service other .
 among of the public other in in well is sectors dedication its service the needs partnerships served effort and citizens and meeting and , governments it Canada by exhibits society of and .
The Government will continue to renew the Public Service of Canada to ensure its members have the skills and dedication to continue serving Canadians well.  
 . Public serving its will continue well have Service renew ensure members continue the to and to Canadians Canada dedication of to Government The the skills
 of . its Canada to to Government members continue to have Service the serving skills Public will continue The Canadians well and dedication the renew ensure
 well ensure dedication . its Canada to renew to have The Public continue Service will Canadians and the serving skills members continue to of Government the
 and well to skills Public serving Government ensure renew the its Canada dedication Canadians of to the will members The to continue continue . Service have
 its well Service Canada Canadians have The will Public renew the to dedication to continue . serving skills and ensure Government the of to members continue
 have Canadians its serving . ensure Canada to skills the continue renew Public well the Government The Service will to members to continue and of dedication
 serving of will to . have dedication ensure Canadians continue its members continue renew well the skills and Government Service to the The Canada to Public
 ensure well have its will Canadians Government serving . to Service The of to dedication Public renew the skills the Canada continue to continue members and
 have The the skills Public serving dedication will the Canadians renew to to members ensure of to Canada Service continue and Government continue . its well
 the Government will to ensure to well Public dedication to of skills Canadians continue its and renew Service have members Canada The the continue serving .
 continue continue to the and Canadians have Public dedication Government well Service . the its serving members to will The skills renew of ensure Canada to
 Public Service The its ensure the of skills and the Canada to . well Canadians to renew have to dedication continue serving members will continue Government
 members and will skills dedication continue ensure Canada have of . to its Public serving The Canadians continue to well renew the to the Service Government
 its have renew skills Canada continue Public to to to the members ensure . The continue well Service the dedication Canadians and Government of serving will
 will Government continue the The have of to ensure the to and Canada to Public members . skills serving continue Service dedication Canadians its well renew
 to and the The serving have Government dedication to its Public members Canada renew will Service of ensure continue continue . to the Canadians well skills
Senator Bolduc :
Honourable senators, I have listened to your arguments attentively. 
You have argued your case like good lawyers. 
There is no doubt about that. 
What you said basically is that it is up to Quebec to address its education problem and decide whether there will be guarantees of denominational education in the schools. 
You say it is a provincial problem. 
In my speech, I have said that there is no guarantee whatsoever that that is what will happen. 
But the right to dissentience that was guaranteed under section 93 of the Constitution will no longer be protected. 
The opinion of the Parti Québécois on this is known, and that is why it is a bit awkward.  
Senator Grafstein :
There are two parts to my honourable friend's question.  
I say, "Yes."  
Once we pass this amendment, it will be for the province of Quebec and those in the Province of Quebec to decide their educational architecture.  
I should like the province of Alberta to do things the way we do them in Ontario. 
Fat chance when it comes to education! 
Honourable senators, I think we have fulfilled our constitutional responsibilities if each senator is individually satisfied that a reasonable test of the majority of the minorities has been achieved. 
Under the evidence presented to us - not outside the room, but before us - that was clear. 
In that respect, I support the report and the resolution.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
It was moved by the Honourable Senator Pépin, seconded by the Honourable Senator Lucier, that this report be adopted.  
 The Government will continue to renew the Public Service of Canada to ensure its members have the skills and dedication continue serving Canadians well .
 its have skills . well the of Canada to dedication Canadians continue the serving ensure to Service will and Government The Public continue renew to
 to The and continue have will continue the Service members . of renew dedication its to to ensure Canadians Public Government the well Canada skills
 will the continue ensure of to serving members skills Public well and Service to renew The continue the have Canadians Canada to dedication Government .
We Have Already Built a Foundation for Our Success 
 a Success We Our Already for Foundation Have Built
 Already Built Our for Success We Have Foundation a
 We for Foundation Already Have a Our Built Success
 Already Our Built We Have for a Success Foundation
 Already Success Foundation Have Our a We for Built
 for Success We Foundation Already a Have Our Built
 Have a Foundation Success Our We Already for Built
 Foundation Our Success Already Have a We for Built
 for Foundation Already Built Have We a Success Our
 Have Foundation a Success Built We for Already Our
 a Foundation We Have Already Success Our for Built
 We Have Foundation Success Our Already for a Built
 Our Foundation Success Already We a Have for Built
 Built a for Our Have Already Success We Foundation
 Have Our for Already Success We Built a Foundation
 for Our Already Built We Have a Foundation Success
Another question concerns the interprovincial competition that can be expected. 
It is obvious that the provinces which used to benefit from preferential rates from the federal fund will pay the going price in future. 
They will borrow, but at a higher rate. 
The increase in debt servicing costs will inflate each province's budget.  
As far as business investment is concerned, will the populations of the provinces agree to have their savings used for businesses in other provinces at the expense of their own? 
Will the provincial governments be tempted to influence the investment board to serve their interests? 
A moment ago I said that when a government agency, a public office, is created, there is a risk of politicizing the process.  
Participation in business, with such enormous amounts, cannot be limited to a few major companies - the Canadian market is not all that big - but will also extend to a multitude of medium-sized businesses. 
The available funding will be sufficient to invest in hundreds of medium-sized businesses. 
In Quebec, for example, if I remember correctly from its last report, the Caisse de dépôt already invests in almost 800 Quebec businesses.  
Now, how are these 800 to be selected and monitored? 
There is likely to be arbitrariness and patronage.  
In addition, the Board will be everywhere and inevitably set conditions. 
Businesses will have to toe the line as the provinces do when Ottawa doles out conditional funding, as you may recall. 
This concentration of power, this centralization will be unhealthy. 
This technocracy and its perverse effects make me nervous. 
I hope one day we will have nothing worse than Mr. Sorros' manoeuvres to criticize.  
The regulations governing investments and the behaviour of administrators have not been revealed. 
They are not ready. 
What guidelines will there be for administrators? 
 We Have Already Built a Foundation for Success
 for Already a Built Success We Our Foundation
 Our Built Already We a for Success Foundation
 Success for Have a Built Already We Our
In recent years, Canadians worked hard and sacrificed to overcome many of our nation's challenges. 
 ' . many overcome and Canadians In hard recent of nation , years worked our challenges s sacrificed to
 recent challenges of worked , nation many ' years sacrificed to Canadians . hard our In s overcome and
 our to hard , of and nation . In Canadians overcome worked recent s challenges ' years many sacrificed
 our of , nation overcome hard years challenges ' and . s to many sacrificed In recent worked Canadians
 years of In challenges worked . our , ' many hard s Canadians sacrificed to and recent overcome nation
 and challenges years overcome , sacrificed In recent nation worked our s of Canadians to hard . ' many
 . In sacrificed our years ' of challenges hard and worked many to , overcome nation recent s Canadians
 recent . nation of ' challenges hard many sacrificed worked years In , s and Canadians to overcome our
 sacrificed worked , years s overcome recent nation In to Canadians ' challenges . hard our and of many
 sacrificed ' many s years of . recent , challenges Canadians to our In hard nation overcome worked and
 In overcome sacrificed and years nation worked hard our challenges ' many of s , recent . to Canadians
 sacrificed In challenges overcome Canadians recent our many . to worked nation ' and hard years s of ,
 nation challenges , recent sacrificed many our to and of hard In worked overcome years ' . s Canadians
 challenges . s nation sacrificed of our ' In Canadians overcome hard many and to worked years recent ,
 of In , Canadians recent to challenges sacrificed years ' nation overcome s many our . and hard worked
 worked many of ' Canadians recent hard sacrificed In nation , challenges our . overcome to s years and
I hope that Senator Grafstein will at least agree that the minister should come before us in Committee of the Whole when we come to the resolution, and be prepared to answer some of these questions.  
Will you agree with me that we invite the minister to attend and debate that and other questions?  
Senator Grafstein :
Honourable senators, I am trying to follow practice and procedure in the Senate. 
I am addressing the report of the special joint committee. 
For me, the question is elucidation for honourable senators to consider that report. 
To me, the evidence and the outcome are clear. 
There may be evidence in other places, and there may be views held by other people, but I had the evidence before the committee. 
I would not say it was totally unequivocal, but it was clear enough to satisfy me that there was a high enough hurdle having been passed to support the federal resolution. 
That is what I have said in my speech. 
Read the evidence. 
Read the transcript. 
It is clear.  
Senator Bolduc :
Honourable senators, I have listened to your arguments attentively. 
You have argued your case like good lawyers. 
There is no doubt about that. 
What you said basically is that it is up to Quebec to address its education problem and decide whether there will be guarantees of denominational education in the schools. 
You say it is a provincial problem. 
In my speech, I have said that there is no guarantee whatsoever that that is what will happen. 
 recent years , Canadians worked hard and sacrificed to overcome many of our nation ' s challenges .
 to overcome s our In . challenges of and many sacrificed , recent years worked hard ' nation
 In to challenges , sacrificed Canadians our worked of nation and ' hard s many recent . overcome
 . recent our Canadians to many hard challenges sacrificed overcome worked ' and In , years s of
We succeeded, and have started to put in place a strong foundation for our success in the new millennium.  
 new . and in the , millennium strong foundation our for place success in a started succeeded have We put to
 foundation . have our started to millennium new for , the strong success in place and put in succeeded We a
 the started succeeded a in in strong foundation , We for new success put and to our have millennium place .
 put millennium success for in , have our and succeeded We to . new a foundation place in strong the started
 the . and for , success succeeded We in put our foundation started to place have a in strong new millennium
 in , strong for succeeded and to . place foundation millennium started success We have a new the our put in
 new success our started put have for foundation , the place strong and to a succeeded . We in in millennium
 the and to success , strong place in millennium . our put have new We for foundation in succeeded a started
 in have place We a our strong millennium foundation success started put and to , succeeded the in for new .
 to a foundation success started . put for in , strong new millennium have in We succeeded and the place our
 the success our . for new We millennium , in to in started foundation a put place have succeeded and strong
 . millennium to the a our success new strong , in succeeded and put in foundation have We for place started
 the in succeeded have for started a put millennium and place strong We our in new . success to foundation ,
 started our a We for . success to new millennium in the place put have foundation succeeded and , strong in
 millennium place a in started . We have , put the strong to succeeded foundation in our success for new and
 a . our to foundation in have We success new succeeded millennium place put the , for started strong in and
Now they want to create a super-RRSP, which does not make any sense because, not only is it at odds with what they said in committee and what they said in the election campaign, it does not fit into their tax plan. 
Remember, they have a tax plan with a flat tax. 
With the flat tax, you reduce the amount of exemptions. 
We are not getting any ideas from them.  
Now I will turn to the Liberals.  
Senator Gigantès :
Be careful.  
Senator Tkachuk :
Since taking office, they have taken $300 million in new taxes from senior citizens by income-testing the age credit. 
They want Canadians to mature their RRSPs by the year they turn 69 rather than the previous age limit of 71. 
However, seniors do not know about it, and this will be another huge tax grab - Merry Christmas, Canada - by the Liberal Government and Paul Martin. 
Twice they have killed plans to increase the RRSP contribution limits so that people could put money away for their future given that the government will not provide for them.  
The Canadian Association of Retired Persons says that as many as 80,000 Canadians may fail to convert their RRSPs on time. 
Where are the big advertising programs of the Government of Canada which they mount when they really want to advertise something? 
This is a government program they do not want to advertise. 
They want it to slip in, just like this bill, so that people will not know and will not make the proper financial decisions, but instead will be exposed to a huge tax load for the year 1997. 
That is what Paul Martin wants, so that in February he can brag in his budget speech about how he has cleaned up the deficit - on the backs of the unemployed, on the backs of senior citizens, and on the backs of young people who will be paying the $400 million to the new pension plan.  
Senator Gigantès :
That is because over nine years you did nothing to address the deficit.  
Senator Tkachuk :
 We succeeded , and have started to put in place a strong foundation for our success the new millennium .
 put our started new millennium in in a success foundation to strong succeeded have and . the We for ,
 We foundation a place the strong to new have , . in in put for success millennium our succeeded and
 and in place succeeded millennium success new have a , strong put foundation our . for the in to We
This 36th Parliament opens at a time when we have brought order to our public finances, and the economy is entering a period of strong growth. 
 of a , public . strong entering This economy we time to a when 36th brought have growth the period Parliament finances and is at our order opens
 is a 36th This have our Parliament entering opens , we period brought strong the to growth of public economy time when and order . finances a at
 is , brought opens time entering we of the Parliament growth a finances have economy a to . when our This public 36th order strong and period at
 a time at growth , Parliament 36th we when our period . economy This to of and brought is order strong finances entering opens the a have public
 and when the is of public Parliament , we period economy strong . time finances order entering at our growth a to a opens 36th have This brought
 growth public have This , economy 36th finances and of opens when our . a strong entering to brought Parliament is time period a the we order at
 period at opens the growth when Parliament have to . 36th order and a , economy of a we is entering time This finances public strong brought our
 . 36th entering This economy when period time order and a opens a brought strong of at is finances the Parliament to growth our public , we have
 strong order This finances is have opens when the public period our Parliament a , we growth to time brought and at economy . of a entering 36th
 and have of the finances brought order a . entering we time public our period 36th is to , at when growth a Parliament economy This strong opens
 This , to have the growth economy and public of opens we Parliament 36th entering when a is time order finances . strong our brought period at a
 , the public opens order to 36th is finances economy brought we entering a when of time strong . and have Parliament growth a at This period our
 finances growth , our a a strong order is Parliament period opens brought entering of to . 36th at economy when have the and public we This time
 have is economy . brought public 36th time a period finances order the our strong when entering a and This Parliament at of we opens to growth ,
 order growth public is the and economy , entering period have time of at a opens we when 36th . strong Parliament This brought a our finances to
 we and is opens when growth Parliament . to 36th of the economy our entering a , time strong order finances a This period have at public brought
That required a hell of a lot of selling to Trudeau, but he went along in the end, as did the nine other premiers, who were willing to reopen their sealed bargain in order to bring in Quebec. 
Mr. Chrétien goes on to say: 
I used to joke that these were the first constitutional amendments in history to have been negotiated over the telephone.  
Let it be noted that Mr. Chrétien takes pride of authorship - "of modifying the principle of minority education...". 
He boasts of getting the agreement of then Prime Minister Trudeau and the nine other premiers, and finds it amusing that this inexcusable abandonment of a fundamental principle was secured over the telephone.  
Honourable senators, Quebec's partial exemption from section 23 was initiated and approved by Mr. Chrétien by including the following in the Constitution Act, 1982: 
59(1) Paragraph 23(1)( a ) shall come into force in respect of Quebec on a day to be fixed by proclamation issued by the Queen or the Governor General under the Great Seal of Canada.  
(2) A proclamation under subsection (1) shall be issued only where authorized by the legislative assembly or government of Quebec. 
Section 23(1)( a ), from which Quebec is exempted by the authors of the Constitution Act themselves, requires that Canadian citizens: 
Finally, I want to comment on the notion of joint committees, particularly those charged with studying a particular item within a given period. 
It was said here, and repeated before the committee, that participation by the Senate must not be interpreted as an abandonment by it of the obligations imposed on the Senate in matters of constitutional amendments. 
It is true that, alone, we cannot defeat an amendment of this nature, as the Senate may be overruled by the House of Commons. 
However, as was shown in the case of the first Term 17 resolution, although the Senate impact on a constitutional amendment is limited, its efforts in this regard can be most constructive. 
I am convinced that if the amendments to it, which the Senate forwarded to the House, had been accepted, Parliament would not be faced with a second Term 17 resolution as it is now, as the Senate amendments satisfied the affected minorities while respecting the Government of Newfoundland's objectives.  
The joint committee was not given enough time to review the Quebec resolution with the care it deserved. 
Witnesses were impressive in numbers, but time restrictions affected their presentations, and questions and answers were too often incomplete when they were not cut short. 
Joint committees of this sort benefit the government, not Parliament, as they are limited in both latitude and independence by the government's control over their agenda. 
This is not meant as a reflection on the work done by the co-chairmen or those who participated on the committee, who I again thank for their excellent work, in particular the co-chairmen, for they toiled under difficult circumstances. 
It is a comment on the concept itself and one, I gather, which can also be applied to the joint committee which has just completed its study of the proposed amendment to Term 17.  
Should joint committees become the rule rather than the exception, and two-thirds of the membership is drawn from the House of Commons, how can one expect sober second thought to win even persuasive arguments? 
 This 36th Parliament opens at a time when we have brought order to our public finances , the economy is entering a period of strong growth .
 time and order brought at a our entering opens strong finances we is to the a period of Parliament This . , 36th when growth public economy
 This a and order when finances brought at our have we period to 36th strong . opens is time economy of a entering Parliament , public the
 of 36th economy strong , period have the entering is at brought public our a we order This Parliament a opens when and finances time . growth
While unemployment is still too high, hundreds of thousands of new jobs are being created by the private sector, inflation is at very low levels, and interest rates are lower than they have been in more than three decades.  
 and are high is thousands of sector levels more of new lower they inflation created , jobs . than have still is are been interest than decades being private three too very hundreds by While unemployment low the , , at in rates
 been by too rates . than inflation lower they private the high have , in jobs , created levels very three are , low is more new interest sector hundreds being than of unemployment of are is thousands While and decades still at
 of sector more being the hundreds than very created , levels is jobs unemployment by high too interest are rates is at , lower decades inflation three of thousands private they are While , new and low still been . have than in
 sector at jobs being hundreds lower inflation been more , the high of by and is . they private have are low thousands too levels are While decades interest in than , unemployment created very , new still is three than rates of
 new more in thousands lower sector very private unemployment are too by are low inflation of jobs is , is have , at created interest high they and decades being three than the hundreds than . rates been still of , While levels
 the rates than being low more is than are of inflation , have still created , jobs and is lower very new thousands levels of sector too are decades three by interest they high private . unemployment been , hundreds at in While
 rates have and of new are low created is levels unemployment , private more too at , decades being are in than While they very thousands inflation interest lower high . three sector than hundreds jobs the been , by still of is
 is been high are jobs being more than interest three sector inflation at new rates by . than they levels still in the are thousands is hundreds decades , have While too , of , and lower very private created unemployment of low
 hundreds than , at of rates decades being created sector the by new is in three jobs they . interest still of inflation levels , too high unemployment private than are is very While lower more thousands and low been have are ,
 than have are three of very being the than are jobs unemployment is been and they still more , private inflation at decades levels sector of While . created too , new rates hundreds low thousands lower , by is interest high in
 , and thousands very three been private too unemployment the . have hundreds is than more they being still While of in , levels are are at by created of inflation high new is sector interest lower jobs than low rates decades ,
 is of high interest , unemployment very in is than at levels been decades of , the still sector rates lower . are three being private low by more jobs inflation While created new thousands are than , too hundreds have they and
 decades , thousands unemployment very lower of too still rates than private is . low is , being the new inflation are sector have at are of they created in been jobs than levels While interest three , high by and more hundreds
 decades thousands than , have high unemployment sector of the levels by low at rates jobs is than are , more While created , inflation of still is and they been interest very being hundreds in private too lower are new three .
 created by than the rates at decades more lower interest have too than low thousands being jobs hundreds is While , unemployment are very and , of been still in are private of sector new inflation high they levels . , three is
 are , rates decades than are thousands created new and While jobs is high sector of inflation by been unemployment levels three the lower private interest they of more low too at being , . very still in than have hundreds is ,
The CPP is part of a larger program that Paul Martin is introducing. 
Everything involves reform. 
We will have a reform of the Old Age Security benefit, which is coming up after Christmas. 
It is important to get through this before Christmas so that we can consider changes in the cut-backs that will come due after Christmas. 
We on this side think that both matters should be discussed together because it is part of a pension program and a part of a social security net for people in this country who retire at 65 and who want to retire with some dignity.  
We strongly believe that this measure is a payroll tax and a job killer. 
Yesterday, Senator Kirby said it was not a payroll tax. 
The Department of Finance did a study in April 1995 which was reported in The Toronto Star . 
The study noted that the relatively modest increase of CPP premiums between 1986 and 1993 resulted in 26,000 fewer jobs. 
It further noted that the increases have had and will continue to have a negative impact on the labour force. 
That contradicts the government's arguments that CPP premiums are not a payroll tax but, rather, a pension contribution. 
In their own report, the Department of Finance stated that employers' contributions to CPP and the Quebec Pension Plan are part of the compulsory payroll tax. 
The department warned against higher payroll taxes in that same report and called this tax just that, namely, a payroll tax.  
We on this side strongly believe there are a number of important issues contained in this bill that we should discuss before it is passed. 
There should be decreases in other taxes, perhaps other payroll taxes such as the employment insurance payroll tax, to make up for the increases in the CPP, so that the negative impact on jobs will not be felt as strongly.  
We should have a full evaluation of any changes to the Old Age Security system and how it will affect future incentives to save. 
The Auditor General should have free access not only to the fund but also to the board itself, lifting the limits on RRSP contributions so that people can have an opportunity to look after themselves, and removing the foreign investment restrictions on RRSP investments.  
Honourable senators, there are elements of truth in all things nefarious. 
That is why we call it propaganda. 
The government is an accomplished practitioner in this art of propaganda, with their plea to save the CPP and their prediction of dire consequences if action is not taken today, this minute. 
 While unemployment is still too high , hundreds of thousands of new jobs are being created by private sector , inflation is at very low levels , and interest rates are lower than they have been in more than three decades .
 , than , and high interest unemployment by more have in of private at still been is While , are they three levels are than is lower of new being thousands inflation very created decades too the rates . hundreds low jobs
 three sector , been the at in are , unemployment , very is and rates still new too inflation being more While hundreds created jobs are high by . they of have private low interest than decades than of lower is levels
 have While high thousands created jobs , still are the interest by are been decades lower and rates , , inflation at than too low three is more very than hundreds is of sector . unemployment new in being they levels private
More Canadian companies are selling more goods and services to the world than ever before.  
 and . services before More ever Canadian are selling more the to companies world goods than
 the ever than are More and to companies before more selling . services Canadian world goods
 before more Canadian to companies are More selling the and services goods than world ever .
 ever are to . companies world goods before the services selling than More more and Canadian
 selling the services before ever world More goods companies than and are Canadian . to more
 and more . selling companies services goods to ever than Canadian before the world More are
 selling before Canadian and to the companies are world than ever goods more services . More
 world and more than More are . selling to Canadian before goods services companies ever the
 services selling are than before ever to and . companies More world Canadian the more goods
 more . services before Canadian than companies goods are to and ever world the More selling
 and before selling world than ever to are goods the companies services More . more Canadian
 companies . the and Canadian More before goods selling more world services are ever than to
 the Canadian more More ever and are goods than selling before services to companies world .
 world . than more goods to companies and before More the ever are Canadian selling services
 world to . goods more services companies Canadian and selling than the ever More are before
 More more companies to services selling and the than are . before Canadian goods ever world
Senator Gigantès :
And you failed. 
You could not do it.  
Senator Tkachuk :
Because the Liberals would not agree. 
I will defend my government, and my honourable friend will defend his.  
I will not delve too far into the OAS because there are other speakers who wish to deal with this issue over the next two weeks. 
Perhaps we, as senators, will be able to discuss this matter well into the new year, which I hope we do.  
Senator Gigantès :
You are reading from the wrong script.  
Senator Taylor :
It is obvious that my honourable friend does not have any notes.  
Senator Tkachuk :
I think I am getting to honourable senators opposite.  
I was told by the Honourable Senator Kirby that members opposite would only have one speaker on this issue. 
I have a feeling that we may hear from a few more senators after I and other senators point out some of the weaknesses in Bill C-2.  
Honourable senators, I would reiterate that this is not a pension program: this is a payroll tax! 
In the past, it harboured cheap loans for provinces, and it will harbour a $100-billion fund that will grow to a $1-trillion fund. 
Honourable senators, we will not need to pay the price. 
We will be long gone before the young people who starting out now, and who expect a pension plan when they grow old, will reap the benefits of what we sow today.  
 More Canadian companies selling more goods and services to the world than ever before .
 before the than to selling More ever and are goods services more world . Canadian
 more Canadian before More selling are companies the and services ever world to . than
 companies are the More . than world services ever selling before more Canadian and goods
Stimulating job creation and economic growth has been, remains, and will continue to be a major objective of the Government of Canada. 
 job Stimulating has been be a economic of and and major creation of the , growth continue Government remains , . to will Canada objective
 creation Government continue of job been and remains and the . major to has of economic , will Canada growth a , objective be Stimulating
 . Stimulating to of of remains be the Canada a continue and creation has been , economic objective growth , Government will job major and
 creation has job Stimulating and , , major . to of Canada economic Government been and the continue of will a growth be remains objective
 a . continue of , creation and job be economic of objective growth remains to Stimulating the has Canada will major Government , and been
 objective and growth , be continue and of remains job Stimulating major the a Canada . economic will of to been , has creation Government
 of creation be remains has Canada continue and objective been growth and , of the job , will Stimulating economic major to a . Government
 economic continue be Canada remains will creation . a of Stimulating objective job major to Government and , been growth , has the of and
 job of the . growth will creation Government and economic to Stimulating has major continue objective of remains been Canada a and , , be
 Government objective be job a major remains of Canada and growth to of creation , continue will the been and Stimulating , has . economic
 the and continue to economic been Stimulating of be major has , and a growth Government Canada creation remains objective , . will job of
 been of Stimulating of Government and remains continue be to has job creation and . a Canada , objective economic the , will growth major
 has to been a Canada major , of economic remains Government be Stimulating the , will and and of continue objective . creation growth job
 remains to has continue growth , major of of and Canada . creation , been be Government will Stimulating job economic objective the a and
 Canada objective been major has and growth of be a to the , continue Government will of Stimulating , creation and job remains . economic
 growth economic Canada continue be a objective job remains to , of Government . will been Stimulating creation has of and the major and ,
Well, two guys who live together for one year may not be gay. 
How would you know?  
Senator Gigantès :
You want surveillance cameras?  
Senator Tkachuk :
So there is an opportunity for fraud. 
This is not a pension program. 
Let us make that clear. 
This is a payroll tax to pay Old Age Pensions, disability, life insurance, benefits to survivors, orphans, children, or exemptions for child rearing. 
We did not have that either, and there is nothing wrong with that. 
They decided that seven years of child rearing would make you part of the CPP labour force, and therefore you can get benefits. 
That is a social program; a good social program, but it is coming out of the pension fund.  
We have spent all this cash over the last 30 years and we say now, "Oh, it is not our fault. 
It is not legislators' fault. 
Senator Gigantès :
Are you quoting the Reform Party?  
Senator Tkachuk :
I do not think so, although I have a few things to say about Reform here too, which I will get to right away.  
I would like to quote Preston Manning's comments from Tuesday, October 28, in committee. 
These are the other guys in the other place. 
 Stimulating job creation and economic growth has been , remains , and will to be a major objective of the Government of Canada .
 creation will . job has , economic to of the been a be Government continue major remains of objective and Stimulating , Canada growth
 will Government Canada . and be a the Stimulating economic to remains major of , , been job and growth creation has of objective
 and to Stimulating objective . Canada major Government of , and will the be of creation job remains a has growth economic continue ,
The Government will build on the progress achieved and the foundations put in place over the last four years to strengthen the economy and increase confidence. 
 on four foundations increase to place last put years strengthen achieved the build the and confidence over and will in economy the progress the . The Government
 four economy progress in achieved years on last and the the . increase will build The place over and Government to put the foundations confidence the strengthen
 four over years progress . achieved economy The confidence the put increase Government to the the build on foundations last in strengthen the and and place will
 . achieved the put The build strengthen economy will the last foundations in to and on Government the confidence years and increase the over progress four place
 last the progress The achieved over on four Government the to in strengthen place economy the the foundations confidence put and increase will . and build years
 in on the increase place build four and strengthen confidence the Government put economy . years the the foundations over last achieved to will progress The and
 the foundations to and over on in Government four The build will years put the last confidence strengthen place the and progress increase economy achieved the .
 economy the build the the in foundations over confidence to strengthen progress The and four the . put will years last Government and on place achieved increase
 the to last economy four years . put in build foundations strengthen achieved Government will The confidence progress place the the over on the increase and and
 increase put and place confidence foundations Government will strengthen The the the build on the . to four economy in achieved over years the progress last and
 place confidence economy the put build strengthen four progress the years increase over on to foundations achieved and in The Government . the last and will the
 the put confidence four place foundations increase progress the will achieved strengthen and the over build to the last The in years . Government economy and on
 the and achieved to increase over economy build last years . the the on progress place put the in will four strengthen Government and The confidence foundations
 years confidence strengthen . economy and the to increase over the on the will place last the The put four achieved progress in foundations build and Government
 the increase put strengthen build achieved the and four in will and the years foundations progress on over . confidence last place Government the to The economy
 strengthen place the build will economy Government on and . The progress put the the the increase years over confidence four last in achieved and foundations to
Senator Wood :
Is it not true in the letter from the bishops of Quebec - the letter the honourable senator read - that they were in favour of repealing section 93? 
They questioned linguistic rights and suggested that denominational guarantees established by 107 be maintained. 
There was a caveat there that my honourable friend forgot to read.  
Senator Grafstein :
I find myself in great difficulty defending Roman Catholic theology let alone letters from Roman Catholic archbishops. 
I will leave it to each senator to come to his or her own conclusion on the testimony and on the letters, which are appended to the report.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Honourable senators, Senator Grafstein is quite right in stating that reform is needed. 
Actually, reform is well under way in Quebec. 
The new system, it seems, will be in place for the next school year. 
New linguistic boards will be set up. 
There will be some difficulties, but, overall, it is proceeding quite well.  
What linkage is there between the new school system in Quebec and the request to exempt Quebec from certain obligations of section 93? 
I do not see any.  
Senator Grafstein :
Honourable senators, there is constitutional law. 
Quebec wants to proceed by the rule of law. 
They are seeking to renovate their system under the rule of law and the Constitution.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
 The Government will build on the progress achieved and the put in place over the last four years to strengthen the economy and increase confidence .
 achieved economy years and strengthen Government the four . put and progress the over will place the build increase in confidence foundations on to the The
 build to progress . the The foundations economy the confidence put four over increase strengthen on and in years achieved the place Government last and the
 years economy and put . over will progress build Government the the achieved and foundations strengthen confidence four to on The in the increase the place
We will pursue this course and take further action to encourage new investment, to create new jobs, and to generate the national wealth necessary to assure Canadians a stable and secure future.  
 Canadians will , future assure to to national . course action necessary stable to generate a and wealth to new further this pursue encourage jobs investment and take , secure the create We and new
 Canadians generate and to secure , and stable create We new to jobs , a action wealth this pursue further assure future investment course national necessary new to will encourage . take and the to
 Canadians action , to to the will . and course future , necessary wealth national new to encourage generate investment take a to this and and further stable pursue new We create secure jobs assure
 . to necessary encourage We further future this , to jobs investment assure to generate and pursue national and create take new will and to new stable action wealth Canadians course the , a secure
 national stable necessary pursue secure course and generate new a and to assure take action to investment to to jobs this , and further , create the future will new We encourage Canadians wealth .
 course will new and wealth and to and future assure , Canadians create to action stable necessary a national encourage , . take investment the new pursue this secure to jobs to further generate We
 necessary further action will stable encourage future to to take We and assure to and secure the and national pursue course create this new new to jobs . generate , wealth , Canadians investment a
 , create stable new investment to generate encourage further and this necessary and new assure We and take . will wealth action secure jobs pursue Canadians to the , future to a to national course
 take to action to jobs . wealth assure a investment generate and further national and future , pursue We will create new secure this to encourage necessary course Canadians the to new , and stable
 investment secure assure and new jobs to to and national this course , wealth new pursue will encourage , necessary . Canadians take future the to create We stable and a action further to generate
 , , a encourage We investment Canadians new stable will new to assure and to jobs national to and the pursue . action necessary further and wealth this create generate course secure take future to
 . course assure to the to jobs stable this new necessary take a to encourage will further to pursue action future new wealth and create Canadians generate We secure and investment national , and ,
 necessary take assure action to stable future further to We new generate course new national create and . secure , will to investment to pursue jobs and the encourage and a Canadians this , wealth
 future to wealth We necessary national and action will create the investment pursue encourage assure , further a . this course new to Canadians stable to and to jobs , secure generate take new and
 further . take , stable will to and Canadians the jobs necessary to this to a and action future encourage secure and create assure generate , wealth new course new investment to national We pursue
 , this further the future wealth to We , and will pursue new . take a and jobs course stable and investment to generate action Canadians national necessary to encourage secure to new create assure
There was not an iota of evidence to prove that what they were saying was correct. 
They did not take any responsibility after cancelling the EH-101 contract. 
They are still talking about it in cabinet. 
Nor did they take any responsibility after their failed strategy in job creation. 
Nor did they take responsibility after almost losing the country in the Quebec referendum. 
"Trust us," they say. 
One thing we can count on is if this government says it is good for Canada, it is not good for Canadians.  
At the time of the 1966 social contract with Canadians, the Liberals were in power. 
They entered into a social contract with their citizens. 
It was they who did it. 
"We will take your money and provide you with a pension," they said. 
As soon as they got their grubby hands on the cash, it was lent to the provinces at favourable interest rates. 
They were cheating Canadians who trusted that when they got old, they would have a pension. 
Baby boomers, who have paid all their working lives since the program's inception, now have the audacity to reach 50. 
We have had the audacity to reach 50!  
Senator Cools :
Not me.  
Senator Tkachuk :
Then they had the gall to limit their breeding, thus causing a situation whereby, 15 years from now, there will be fewer people working to pay for the people who turn 65 at that time. 
They limited their breeding. 
 We will pursue this course and take further action to encourage new investment , to create new jobs , and to generate the national wealth necessary to assure Canadians a and secure future .
 necessary new the to Canadians take future We a further create and and wealth action pursue to . investment this new to will secure , stable generate and jobs encourage national to assure ,
 necessary stable future the wealth further secure pursue generate and new assure will national to new take . investment course to action encourage We Canadians to this to create and a , jobs ,
 course and investment new . future jobs Canadians to to new further encourage and assure We and action necessary to the create , a take generate will , pursue national this to secure wealth
The Government will continue to be vigilant and responsible about keeping the financial affairs of the country in order: 
 to keeping and will be order : responsible The vigilant the of affairs the Government financial in about continue country
 financial Government be and continue vigilant the will of affairs to country keeping the The responsible : in order about
 : the to financial and Government be keeping in vigilant continue the will of country order about responsible The affairs
 country order in responsible about the to continue The be will Government and vigilant the keeping financial of : affairs
 of country financial The continue Government the and order the : be in about responsible vigilant keeping will affairs to
 country Government of order affairs will continue to the financial : and about be the keeping The responsible vigilant in
 vigilant keeping to affairs about The of will and Government order be country in continue responsible the financial the :
 responsible : keeping the and Government in The about will continue order financial be the to affairs of vigilant country
 responsible and to Government the order in affairs The financial will country be continue about keeping : vigilant the of
 country order the to The in be vigilant affairs responsible financial : the Government will continue about of and keeping
 continue be to order Government The country will about the the keeping affairs financial vigilant of in responsible and :
 keeping vigilant : and the to about affairs country Government in will financial The the responsible order of continue be
 and vigilant be order about in Government the of will to : keeping the affairs responsible financial The country continue
 and affairs Government be to of the vigilant keeping continue The : the about will country responsible order financial in
 affairs financial The : Government continue the about the country to be vigilant will order of keeping responsible in and
 Government continue about to responsible affairs the the The in keeping vigilant and order country of will be : financial
Honourable senators, I will not go back over the very important points raised by my colleague with respect to the intergenerational inequity in this bill. 
I would like to look at other aspects of the problem.  
Honourable senators, the government is proposing to amend the CPP. 
I would have found it appropriate to examine all the major aspects of the plan at this time. 
This has been done for some important facets such as its survival, its management and its performance. 
I will address these shortly.  
This strikes me as an important question. 
Why, for instance, if I do not wish to contribute and prefer to look after my own financial security, should I be obliged by law to participate in the plan, even if I am prepared to sign a document absolving the government of all responsibility on my account? 
Why must everyone belong to a plan whose money will be invested by others, by public servants?  
The government's response to this fundamental question is obligatory collectivization. 
The government seems to assume that Canadians are irresponsible, ignorant, and improvident, and that big brother in Ottawa knows best.  
If he is so competent, what has this big brother been doing for 20 years? 
He agreed to give pension benefits to people, but forgot to levy what he needed to be able to do so, and what he levied, he loaned to the provinces at such low rates that, unless there are drastic changes, the plan will go bankrupt.  
Here we have a classic case of public mismanagement. 
On the one hand, they hand out goodies and, on the other, they forget to charge for them. 
And now they have learned nothing from this sad tale:
Ottawa is asking for even more from everyone and tells us that this time it will invest the money wisely and that it will be for the future good of all.  
Honourable senators, I would much more prefer looking after my own retirement, and I know many Canadians who would like to be free to do what they want with their own money.  
There are many other aspects of this bill that require serious consideration, but I will deal here with only one or two.  
The bill provides for the creation of a government agency responsible for investing the funds collected from contributors to the Canada Pension Plan.  
 The Government will continue to be vigilant and responsible about keeping the financial of the country in order :
 country in affairs the of will keeping vigilant order Government about The the : continue financial and be to
 country continue vigilant to affairs about financial responsible of Government the : be the The and will order keeping
 to in financial order vigilant the the and continue : will of keeping affairs responsible be The country about
It will put the debt-to-GDP ratio on a permanent downward track.  
 - - a to GDP track the It will on permanent debt . downward put ratio
 will - - track permanent debt to a GDP on . downward ratio the put It
 will the to track - put - GDP ratio . a permanent downward on debt It
 put the on debt GDP track a will downward - ratio It - . to permanent
 ratio debt GDP a . downward the on permanent will - to It - put track
 put the on track ratio - permanent GDP It - . downward to debt will a
 permanent ratio It to downward - a debt put will . - track GDP on the
 downward permanent on debt put the GDP a track - - will to ratio . It
 It to ratio debt permanent - put will a . track - the GDP on downward
 the GDP will a track downward - . ratio put It debt to - permanent on
 a GDP to It the downward debt put will permanent ratio track - on . -
 downward ratio - will the debt put . - to permanent It on GDP a track
 downward to ratio the . put permanent GDP on It track - - will a debt
 ratio will on track debt put permanent GDP the - to It downward - a .
 GDP a permanent - on to downward . the put will track ratio - It debt
 - GDP It on will - put a downward to permanent the track . ratio debt
Provincial finance ministers met in Ottawa. 
I think last night they had dinner with Finance Minister Paul Martin. 
In an article in The Globe and Mail yesterday, it was stated: 
With Ontario's Ernie Eves and B.C.'s Andrew Petter leading the charge, the provincial ministers have made it clear that they consider Mr. Martin's recent $1.4 billion cut to unemployment insurance premiums insufficient...  
The premiers have insisted that they have some input into Ottawa's budget-making and how it allocates the surplus among new spending, tax cuts and debt repayment.  
In a telephone interview on Friday, Mr. Petter said the NDP government in British Columbia wants Ottawa to offset a dramatic increase in Canada Pension Plan premiums with reductions in UI premiums.  
"We're worried about the impact that Canada Pension Plan increases will have in terms of the burden they will impose on business and workers, and the potential they have to reduce job creation by a huge amount if they go ahead without some kind of offsetting relief," Mr. Petter said.  
Ontario's Conservative government is also demanding large cuts to UI premiums, Mr. Eves said in an interview...  
Alberta Treasurer Stockwell Day also indicated last week that he'll be pushing Mr. Martin for tax cuts.  
I predict today that, although this government has managed to get away with things for which our government would have been slaughtered, I think this bill, coupled with what is coming down the track and the changes in OAS and GIS, coupled with the arrogance of the stance taken at Kyoto, this is the kind of arrogance that, inevitably, will be the downfall of this government. 
I predict that that is about to happen.  
Hon. Thelma J. Chalifoux :
Honourable senators, I have a number of concerns regarding the statements of Senator Stratton. 
I would like to know what his position is on the working poor and on part-time workers. 
In this country, there are more part-time workers and more working poor than there are people who identify as middle class. 
What is the honourable senator's opinion on that?  
In this country, we have a totally isolated segment of society which is called "the mid-Canada corridor." 
Even in terms of communications, there is very little. 
What would the honourable senator do in the area of communication for those in isolated settlements regarding private pension plans? 
There are no words in Cree or michif for "private pension plan."  
 It will put the debt - - GDP ratio on a permanent downward track .
 the GDP It debt to on . - a put - will downward permanent ratio
 GDP to put the track It . on a - permanent downward debt will -
 will track on - GDP - debt permanent put the to ratio It a .
It will balance the budget no later than fiscal year 1998-99.  
 1998 than budget It year will - 99 balance later fiscal no the .
 . budget will It balance - later the year 1998 than no fiscal 99
 budget than 99 1998 balance . fiscal will later It - year the no
 year budget It fiscal the balance . - 1998 will no than later 99
 balance budget year 1998 no - will fiscal later . the 99 than It
 budget balance will It year no the fiscal than 1998 - . later 99
 no the - will 1998 later year 99 It budget fiscal . balance than
 It will no fiscal than later . 99 the 1998 - budget balance year
 later fiscal budget . 99 the will 1998 no It year - balance than
 - fiscal balance . the 99 later no 1998 year will budget It than
 than 99 budget fiscal later balance . no the 1998 - will It year
 later balance 1998 99 budget . will than It fiscal the no year -
 99 the - than . balance fiscal year will 1998 later budget no It
 balance It than the 99 - year no later budget . fiscal will 1998
 year later balance 99 It than 1998 budget . no will - the fiscal
 99 budget 1998 fiscal balance the It year than later no - . will
That is, in fact, what has been done since 1996 under the present system. 
It must be ensured that a conflict of interest of this kind is not permitted at all. 
I will return to this shortly.  
My fourth point concerns investment policy. 
The law should provide that the administrators of the fund are responsible for ensuring contributors a reasonable pension, while providing them with the best return, that is, the safest and best return possible.  
Canada's economy represents about 2.5 per cent of the world economy. 
So it would be wise to permit the fund not only to diversify its investments in stocks and bonds but also to invest worldwide. 
Diversification of values, in a variety of instruments, in various sectors, in different countries and currencies is thus a measure of wisdom and judgement to be left to those in charge, who must, of course, be accountable for their actions.  
Honourable senators, it would be tempting for the administrators to act as investors on occasion by investing in all sorts of businesses with their judgement either arbitrary or verging on patronage. 
We have seen this in Quebec. 
There must be strict rules to prevent this sort of thing, if we want to avoid regrettable misuse.  
The matter of the pension plan's objectives is basic. 
In this respect, the legislation must be clear. 
The board must first and foremost look after the interests of the contributors whose income security depends on its performance to a large extent.  
The history of the Quebec Caisse de dépôt et placement warrants examination in this regard. 
In the mid-1960s, at the time it was set up, Mr. Lesage, the Premier of Quebec at the time, described it as an instrument of social security. 
He added, at the instigation of some, that it would also be an instrument of economic development, with the result that, little by little, the managers who were not sufficiently dynamic in the eyes of the directors were replaced. 
It was not Mr. Caouette's money, it was real bucks. 
The second director was also an experienced investment fund manager, but the government changed in Quebec, and we ended up with people who were more dynamic and who wanted to direct the economy. 
That is when it was decided that the people running the Caisse were not dynamic enough and had to be replaced. 
 will balance the budget no later than fiscal year 1998 - 99 .
 budget - It the no year later . will than balance fiscal 99
 later It fiscal will balance year 1998 the than no budget . 99
 budget . 99 no than It will - balance the 1998 fiscal later
It will introduce legislation to implement the proposed changes to the Canada Pension Plan and the new Seniors Benefit in order to ensure Canada's public pension system remains sustainable in the 21st century.  
 Seniors legislation Canada the . pension new implement the to public introduce Pension century sustainable in Canada to remains Benefit the 21st ensure and will It system proposed to Plan order the in s ' changes
 ensure 21st century implement new ' sustainable in proposed to Canada the Canada s will the to legislation the the in and public system Plan order Benefit changes remains . Seniors introduce It pension Pension to
 public system sustainable ' the Benefit s will new in ensure and Seniors It introduce changes legislation Plan the 21st . Pension to pension order to in to Canada the proposed implement the century Canada remains
 It remains Canada Pension new ensure introduce sustainable pension the to 21st order proposed in changes will and to . the ' to Plan century the s system in the Canada public legislation Seniors Benefit implement
 public s ' pension in legislation introduce Plan the and Benefit the system Canada the sustainable order 21st proposed the Pension Canada ensure to to in It Seniors century will remains to new changes implement .
 Seniors and introduce the Plan Canada sustainable proposed to Pension to in It ensure public new the pension century system legislation Benefit will . the order Canada implement the remains s 21st changes ' to in
 Pension 21st ' s new proposed order legislation to public to the Canada will It . changes system implement in ensure the and Seniors introduce Plan Benefit to pension century the the in remains Canada sustainable
 implement Benefit Canada legislation will to century proposed changes the ensure Seniors in . pension introduce sustainable s to remains public to new 21st ' the Canada Pension order in the It and Plan system the
 to introduce remains ' Seniors will It public Canada Plan in 21st century in ensure to pension the sustainable new the order s system . Pension proposed the to and Benefit changes legislation the implement Canada
 implement 21st proposed introduce public and . Canada order Canada sustainable the remains legislation will Seniors in Pension the the the to Benefit s pension It ensure new to system in ' to changes century Plan
 in legislation and to the remains the Canada Plan It sustainable implement ensure proposed introduce order to ' Pension pension . the will to public changes Benefit system new in century s Seniors the Canada 21st
 in Plan the the to . to It the Seniors introduce in proposed remains Canada public implement s the and will Canada legislation century system Pension ensure order changes ' Benefit sustainable 21st new pension to
 s in . system and remains order to pension to changes Seniors ensure 21st It proposed Canada implement new the will the sustainable the Canada to Plan Pension century in the ' introduce Benefit public legislation
 the the to legislation implement ' system to . century Seniors 21st Plan Canada Benefit and s It in Canada pension remains to the ensure order proposed new changes introduce in Pension public the sustainable will
 Canada the the will ' system implement in remains to and order Seniors 21st It Plan to s to introduce new in pension public Canada the changes proposed Pension Benefit the legislation century ensure sustainable .
 s the remains Canada 21st new public proposed to Pension . in ensure Canada implement sustainable century Benefit Plan introduce It to ' the order pension and system in will legislation Seniors the changes to the
Senator Taylor :
Elect the Liberals and it will be high!  
Senator Tkachuk :
If we elect the Liberals, inflation will be high? 
We already know that! 
Let me continue in that vein. 
Perhaps honourable senators opposite do not want to hear what Paul Martin will be doing, and the explaining that you will have to do back home in 10 or 15 years when your children ask you what you did about this bill. 
When they retire, their CPP benefits will be worth about what they put in, plus 2.5 per cent.  
I do not get it. 
I do not understand why we are being asked to do that to our children, so that those who are retiring today can receive full benefits and those who are retiring soon can get their benefits. 
I do not get it. 
I will try to explain it today, and - I hope I can convince you.  
The CPP is part of a larger program that Paul Martin is introducing. 
Everything involves reform. 
We will have a reform of the Old Age Security benefit, which is coming up after Christmas. 
It is important to get through this before Christmas so that we can consider changes in the cut-backs that will come due after Christmas. 
We on this side think that both matters should be discussed together because it is part of a pension program and a part of a social security net for people in this country who retire at 65 and who want to retire with some dignity.  
We strongly believe that this measure is a payroll tax and a job killer. 
Yesterday, Senator Kirby said it was not a payroll tax. 
The Department of Finance did a study in April 1995 which was reported in The Toronto Star . 
 It will introduce legislation to implement the proposed to the Canada Pension Plan and the new Seniors Benefit in order to ensure Canada ' s public pension system remains sustainable in the 21st century .
 system It to changes legislation Plan century proposed Canada the in pension order to ensure public Pension Canada remains sustainable introduce Benefit 21st the ' Seniors to and the in new . implement s will
 Seniors implement changes will 21st Canada Plan pension introduce order system It to the s the ensure the Pension ' legislation to remains proposed . in public to and in Benefit new century the Canada
 Canada century changes remains introduce . Seniors proposed legislation the will public in Pension sustainable in ' to It ensure the the to s Plan and system Canada pension new order implement 21st the to
One in three Canadian jobs depend on trade. 
 . three depend trade on One jobs Canadian in
 on jobs in Canadian One . trade depend three
 One in jobs Canadian three on . trade depend
 One depend on . Canadian three trade in jobs
 jobs One . trade depend Canadian three on in
 three on One . Canadian jobs trade depend in
 in Canadian on three . One jobs trade depend
 in One on three trade . jobs Canadian depend
 depend One on in three Canadian . trade jobs
 three One jobs depend trade . on Canadian in
 trade in on jobs . three Canadian One depend
 depend . jobs Canadian on three in trade One
 depend Canadian One trade three . jobs on in
 Canadian . jobs depend three trade on in One
 One three on depend . jobs trade Canadian in
 trade in . depend One Canadian three jobs on
Diversification of values, in a variety of instruments, in various sectors, in different countries and currencies is thus a measure of wisdom and judgement to be left to those in charge, who must, of course, be accountable for their actions.  
Honourable senators, it would be tempting for the administrators to act as investors on occasion by investing in all sorts of businesses with their judgement either arbitrary or verging on patronage. 
We have seen this in Quebec. 
There must be strict rules to prevent this sort of thing, if we want to avoid regrettable misuse.  
The matter of the pension plan's objectives is basic. 
In this respect, the legislation must be clear. 
The board must first and foremost look after the interests of the contributors whose income security depends on its performance to a large extent.  
The history of the Quebec Caisse de dépôt et placement warrants examination in this regard. 
In the mid-1960s, at the time it was set up, Mr. Lesage, the Premier of Quebec at the time, described it as an instrument of social security. 
He added, at the instigation of some, that it would also be an instrument of economic development, with the result that, little by little, the managers who were not sufficiently dynamic in the eyes of the directors were replaced. 
It was not Mr. Caouette's money, it was real bucks. 
The second director was also an experienced investment fund manager, but the government changed in Quebec, and we ended up with people who were more dynamic and who wanted to direct the economy. 
That is when it was decided that the people running the Caisse were not dynamic enough and had to be replaced. 
That was done. 
That is how a deputy minister of finance came to be the president of the Caisse de dépôt et placement du Québec at a time when Finance Minister Parizeau was a very influential member of the Lévesque cabinet. 
This led Quebec industry leaders and other stakeholders to raise all sorts of questions about the policy and management of the Caisse under his direction.  
You know the arbitrary risks inherent in choosing the companies in which the board can invest. 
Of course, there are provisions to limit the ratio, but everyone knows that the percentage of shares required today to control a company is relatively small. 
Can you imagine what kind of arm-twisting this will lead to? 
To collectivize an operation is to politicize it. 
 One in three jobs depend on trade .
 in Canadian trade jobs on One depend .
 Canadian in depend on . trade jobs three
 jobs on depend three in One . Canadian
Our prosperity and our ability to create jobs are directly linked to how well we capitalize on international opportunities. 
 jobs international on . capitalize we well how to create directly linked ability Our prosperity our to opportunities are and
 capitalize are . prosperity to international and create we directly on Our ability how to jobs our linked well opportunities
 on our Our to are how prosperity directly opportunities and ability we to capitalize jobs well international linked create .
 create ability prosperity directly international jobs linked capitalize our we to on are Our to well opportunities how . and
 prosperity our to ability how directly international are well Our create to opportunities and . capitalize jobs we on linked
 opportunities our Our we jobs on create ability linked capitalize directly how prosperity well international . and to to are
 our prosperity ability create we how to and on directly linked are to opportunities jobs capitalize . Our international well
 Our we our on prosperity are to linked . ability and create opportunities to directly how well international capitalize jobs
 how Our we prosperity to create well international to linked directly on are ability our and opportunities . capitalize jobs
 linked opportunities create well we capitalize international are our directly and jobs to prosperity ability how . to on Our
 Our create capitalize to on ability directly we opportunities international jobs our well are how . and prosperity to linked
 directly prosperity create capitalize we how our Our opportunities linked and on . ability are well to jobs international to
 well to . are and create how Our jobs directly opportunities we our to capitalize on international prosperity linked ability
 capitalize to opportunities well on our ability jobs are linked directly to we create Our how international and . prosperity
 on directly . and well jobs linked ability to Our create international are how opportunities to we our prosperity capitalize
 to jobs . well ability our are capitalize and we opportunities prosperity create Our how linked on international directly to
I hope one day we will have nothing worse than Mr. Sorros' manoeuvres to criticize.  
The regulations governing investments and the behaviour of administrators have not been revealed. 
They are not ready. 
What guidelines will there be for administrators? 
A parliamentary review is therefore vital before their implementation.  
In concluding, I would say to the government that the preferable alternative to its bill would be to simply oblige everyone in the labour force in Canada to invest a percentage of their savings in funds under private management or let government assume its role by providing a safety net for those who could not set aside enough money for their old age.  
Here is an intelligent response to the challenge before us. 
However, and it is regrettable in this era of the welfare state, it seems to me that we prefer to make sweeping rules that apply to everyone in order to resolve the problem of a few.  
Hon. Philippe Deane Gigantès :
You talk with admiration of private investment management. 
How do you explain the disaster at Olympia & York, for example, under the management of Mr. Eyton, our colleague, and the fact that major players like Conrad Black closed Dominion Stores and took the money Dominion Stores employees had invested in a pension fund, a fund they never drew from? 
Are you telling us that the private sector will be more generous and wise than the Caisse de dépôt in Quebec? 
Senator Bolduc :
I did not say disasters did not happen in the private sector. 
Senator Gigantès :
It is not a big deal if you have $3 million, but it is if you lose $35,000 or $70,000 and this is all the money you have. 
It may not be a big deal for you, but it is for small investors.  
Senator Bolduc :
Honourable senators, I never said there would not be any damage in the private sector. 
Some damage is done every day. 
 Our prosperity and our ability to create jobs are directly linked to well we capitalize on international opportunities .
 prosperity how jobs to to international and capitalize opportunities are we our create directly linked . well Our ability
 well ability on linked our how create Our capitalize . we jobs opportunities directly are and international to prosperity
 and well Our linked international to we directly create are jobs how capitalize on opportunities prosperity . ability to
Team Canada trade missions have successfully generated new opportunities for Canadian businesses and have illustrated what we can accomplish when governments and the private sector collaborate. 
 businesses successfully the generated when private for opportunities we Team accomplish have missions what and new have . Canada can illustrated governments collaborate and trade Canadian sector
 governments and we Team generated Canadian private have . have opportunities trade new collaborate and for illustrated the Canada what when sector accomplish businesses successfully missions can
 what have have governments generated new can opportunities the missions . businesses and collaborate and we for illustrated trade successfully Canadian private sector Team when Canada accomplish
 have . generated accomplish and have private Canada opportunities trade Canadian missions can businesses Team successfully illustrated sector we for governments collaborate what and new when the
 can . and trade the for missions opportunities new successfully generated governments what collaborate we have businesses Team Canada Canadian illustrated sector and private when accomplish have
 missions what can trade opportunities businesses generated when . collaborate sector have and have accomplish governments private Canadian and Team new successfully we Canada the for illustrated
 when and businesses have missions and Canadian collaborate accomplish Canada Team can trade we generated what illustrated the new successfully opportunities . have for sector private governments
 sector illustrated Canadian opportunities accomplish . generated and trade new the missions businesses have for Team have collaborate when private we what and can successfully Canada governments
 and Canada what governments Canadian accomplish can Team trade and when have private generated new successfully for illustrated missions sector collaborate . the opportunities we businesses have
 Team . trade accomplish businesses private collaborate generated new missions we have can Canada and governments sector opportunities for when what the have and Canadian illustrated successfully
 successfully Team have collaborate for have can and what businesses missions illustrated accomplish when private sector generated we Canada . trade the opportunities Canadian new and governments
 trade governments generated and for Team have businesses illustrated accomplish successfully have the when Canada what . missions Canadian private can new opportunities collaborate and we sector
 Canada have successfully we sector illustrated and businesses what can missions and . trade private governments Team opportunities have collaborate generated for Canadian when new the accomplish
 illustrated trade and the sector missions have accomplish when generated private collaborate businesses we Canadian new successfully Canada . what have Team governments for and can opportunities
 governments the trade we missions collaborate sector private Canada for what successfully opportunities Canadian Team businesses illustrated and generated . and have can accomplish have when new
 can . Canadian opportunities missions have illustrated generated governments for new collaborate accomplish have what businesses Canada we Team trade and successfully the private when sector and
It was the perfect pension plan:
Pay all your lives, and then die just as the first cheque is put into the mail. 
If there was a postal strike, the government had the benefit of both worlds - the pensioner was dead and the cheque was in the mail.  
From the beginning, the CPP was simple, but it was misnamed. 
It was misnamed because it is also a life insurance program. 
However, it is a silly program when it is part of a pension plan.  
Instead of cancelling the benefit, there is an argument made as to whether it should be means tested when cancelled or not. 
That is an area where we can save a lot of money because, as people are dying today, cheques are going out in the mail, at $3,500 a shot. 
Yet we do not have enough money to pay proper pensions when people are alive.  
It is also a disability program. 
There is nothing wrong with having a disability program, but it is part of the Canada Pension Plan now. 
It is part of a payroll tax to buy universal disability insurance, and then the social engineers took over.  
I want to give senators an historical perspective. 
There have been many amendments made over the years to the CPP. 
Yet, the government has said, "We will not touch that fund." 
However, they touched the other fund. 
Since 1973, they have been making new legislation and implementing new programs. 
Why will they not use the fund that will accumulate on the other side, over which Parliament has no control? 
We saw this stuff today when we were studying the Estimates. 
The government has said that we did it, as Tories. 
 Team Canada trade missions have successfully generated new opportunities for Canadian businesses and have illustrated what we can accomplish when governments and private sector collaborate .
 opportunities collaborate private and and sector illustrated the trade have Canada . accomplish successfully can Canadian missions have governments generated businesses Team we new when for
 generated and when Canada illustrated Team private have missions for new sector we and successfully the opportunities collaborate can trade . governments Canadian what have businesses
 we the missions . Team trade successfully private and new can sector governments generated when for Canadian and opportunities collaborate businesses Canada what have accomplish illustrated
The Government will build on this success with a focused strategy, developed in consultation with industry, to improve our international economic performance by expanding Canada's trade base, becoming the location of choice for global investment, and making Canada a preferred tourist destination.  
 trade becoming performance tourist to Canada ' destination and a this with success , global s developed , with economic . on investment making strategy industry our base the build expanding , will improve of for a focused international preferred by choice Government location , consultation Canada in The
 tourist base a will industry , of . Canada to international choice success ' The by and Canada strategy improve , location with developed focused trade on the becoming in consultation , global build preferred with making investment a performance Government economic destination for , expanding our s this
 trade of to performance base our tourist by international consultation improve this with . on expanding making global strategy success a choice destination will becoming Government , with , developed preferred location investment build , , Canada The the a in focused s economic Canada ' for industry and
 of s global investment trade , the focused choice to economic Canada destination , performance tourist improve . a developed , location international becoming , Canada consultation build industry success will ' by Government strategy The in base making for our on expanding preferred this a with with and
 developed this choice becoming a trade industry preferred with The expanding and performance for in focused with location success Government by to will of , international build , base on strategy global destination , ' s a tourist the consultation improve Canada . Canada , making our economic investment
 economic location industry global Government , trade ' and expanding will preferred our on for consultation a improve developed by the to with focused strategy of build a , investment choice with , this base in , international success tourist s Canada Canada . performance destination making becoming The
 for Canada industry investment this our global build base , ' a location in focused . trade on Government becoming strategy tourist expanding s , and making by economic to choice , international Canada the a with The destination will preferred developed improve with success consultation performance of ,
 will to The for this becoming Canada the build trade developed making and international , choice base . our performance on by with Government ' , strategy preferred with focused economic industry location a of in consultation expanding improve , tourist Canada global s , investment success destination a
 international making , of developed strategy will Canada focused with location choice investment by this with base on performance tourist consultation trade , success improve Canada Government becoming destination a economic The build . , industry to the ' s expanding a preferred for and , our global in
 will by economic this investment a , developed location , strategy Canada . Government expanding to trade consultation success with performance the of s focused in improve The choice destination and for tourist making with on base a our international , industry , preferred build Canada ' global becoming
 consultation performance for will success , . build a expanding industry trade the strategy becoming tourist location , developed focused preferred base international improve making by destination with Government with in our ' a s this , Canada economic to Canada choice global and The , on of investment
 preferred with this Canada for destination trade global performance choice expanding and . success in international becoming industry focused making ' , developed our The s will , with base a a by strategy the of investment , build improve to Government tourist consultation economic location on Canada ,
 focused the Canada with for The . of in Government preferred economic expanding Canada choice , build and making international a improve industry to a investment tourist with global this becoming developed s on , by our ' success , location performance will destination trade base strategy , consultation
 consultation expanding , of economic choice global base ' making will improve this becoming in the industry destination success a by our with international , focused developed build location and The trade Canada strategy for , with s a . Government to , preferred performance tourist investment Canada on
 will on , performance a build to Canada with strategy developed in , Government location improve s this focused the destination our of Canada ' investment The , tourist for industry becoming success choice economic a preferred expanding base with global and international . , consultation making trade by
 ' of , global our Government this location choice investment tourist focused for trade a The with a strategy and Canada in , base by with economic to on the performance Canada becoming build making success . destination developed international will expanding consultation s industry improve preferred , ,
Actually, reform is well under way in Quebec. 
The new system, it seems, will be in place for the next school year. 
New linguistic boards will be set up. 
There will be some difficulties, but, overall, it is proceeding quite well.  
What linkage is there between the new school system in Quebec and the request to exempt Quebec from certain obligations of section 93? 
I do not see any.  
Senator Grafstein :
Honourable senators, there is constitutional law. 
Quebec wants to proceed by the rule of law. 
They are seeking to renovate their system under the rule of law and the Constitution.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
That is not my question.  
Senator Grafstein :
I assume that if they choose to proceed, they can. 
However, why should we in the Senate allow any province to proceed in a way that we consider unlawful? 
If there is an amendment to the Constitution, each senator in his or her heart and mind, after reviewing the testimony, must come to a conclusion. 
He or she can either vote for, against or abstain from the vote on the resolution.  
They want to be under the law, as does the Province of Newfoundland. 
They want to be under the Constitution. 
If they meet the standards of a constitutional change, I, for one, will support them, notwithstanding the fact that I mistrust their motivation and mistrust what they say. 
 The Government will build on this success with a focused strategy , developed in consultation with industry , to improve our international economic performance by expanding Canada ' s trade base , becoming the location of choice for investment , and making Canada a preferred tourist destination .
 focused economic on this Canada global expanding investment performance . , industry success improve with base of Government a choice Canada by preferred to , consultation , international The build destination developed making for our strategy ' trade the tourist with location becoming a , will and s
 focused , for of by The becoming with developed trade build international performance success , the improve , on consultation Canada this economic global industry destination a s and tourist will ' to strategy . expanding Government in making , base our preferred location a investment choice Canada
 tourist Canada , ' a on , making performance trade with destination with success location economic the this Canada investment . improve s Government build to our of in and by for international strategy expanding a The base global , preferred industry will consultation focused developed , choice
The Government has regained the ability to address priorities of Canadians while living within its means. 
 means Canadians its Government to the regained priorities of address The within living . while ability has
 to means within The has the Government while of address priorities . Canadians living its ability regained
 . its Government The address means priorities has to within of Canadians regained the while ability living
 priorities . of to means ability has address Government Canadians within regained living The the its while
 The its Government the living of address means ability has regained within to priorities Canadians . while
 regained has within The ability living while of its the means Government address to . priorities Canadians
 while within the regained . address The means to of Government Canadians its ability has priorities living
 Canadians The living Government ability its regained to . of address while has the means within priorities
 within has living to The Government its regained the means Canadians ability while priorities address of .
 address the has regained its means Government The while priorities living of Canadians ability within . to
 of regained its Government ability has while The Canadians to living . means address the priorities within
 of ability address Canadians its Government while The to within . priorities means the regained living has
 The Government address ability . the priorities within while Canadians its means living of regained has to
 living . address ability The regained to has its means within Government while Canadians of priorities the
 means . regained has priorities address ability the to Canadians while living The of within its Government
 Canadians regained has to address priorities The ability means within living its the while . Government of
This technocracy and its perverse effects make me nervous. 
I hope one day we will have nothing worse than Mr. Sorros' manoeuvres to criticize.  
The regulations governing investments and the behaviour of administrators have not been revealed. 
They are not ready. 
What guidelines will there be for administrators? 
A parliamentary review is therefore vital before their implementation.  
In concluding, I would say to the government that the preferable alternative to its bill would be to simply oblige everyone in the labour force in Canada to invest a percentage of their savings in funds under private management or let government assume its role by providing a safety net for those who could not set aside enough money for their old age.  
Here is an intelligent response to the challenge before us. 
However, and it is regrettable in this era of the welfare state, it seems to me that we prefer to make sweeping rules that apply to everyone in order to resolve the problem of a few.  
Hon. Philippe Deane Gigantès :
You talk with admiration of private investment management. 
How do you explain the disaster at Olympia & York, for example, under the management of Mr. Eyton, our colleague, and the fact that major players like Conrad Black closed Dominion Stores and took the money Dominion Stores employees had invested in a pension fund, a fund they never drew from? 
Are you telling us that the private sector will be more generous and wise than the Caisse de dépôt in Quebec? 
Senator Bolduc :
I did not say disasters did not happen in the private sector. 
Senator Gigantès :
It is not a big deal if you have $3 million, but it is if you lose $35,000 or $70,000 and this is all the money you have. 
It may not be a big deal for you, but it is for small investors.  
Senator Bolduc :
Honourable senators, I never said there would not be any damage in the private sector. 
 The Government has regained the ability to address priorities of Canadians while living within its .
 Canadians to while means regained has address living its . ability of Government The within priorities
 to of within means its ability address has . The Canadians while living Government priorities regained
 within its means living has regained while the address ability to The Canadians of priorities .
It is now in the position to make strategic investments in our children and our youth, our health, our communities, and our knowledge and creativity while continuing to improve the nation's finances.  
 It , s . our communities investments and our to creativity health our , , the nation and now and is make strategic finances to in in position youth ' knowledge while our our continuing children improve the
 ' now and finances , the creativity in our children , It youth health our improve is to make position investments our , while to and communities . knowledge continuing strategic our the our s nation and in
 , make is continuing health . our children to improve and our and to and nation the , communities ' finances strategic s knowledge youth our creativity our in It our , now while investments position the in
 in communities health now is improve to . in our position s our and finances make the children knowledge to while strategic and creativity , , our investments continuing ' youth nation It our the , our and
 continuing and the creativity strategic our . s our and our communities to the our and youth knowledge investments health , in now is our ' finances , children to , improve It position in make while nation
 while in and , improve communities our in It now our children knowledge and is . our position to health youth the s make finances to the investments continuing ' creativity our nation and strategic , , our
 creativity children our communities ' It and investments to s strategic . health in improve , our make position now our the knowledge and continuing , nation is , the while our our to youth finances in and
 . now in ' to our It improve nation our the health creativity and the children to investments youth our position , communities our is strategic , and knowledge in make and while s continuing , our finances
 ' . our finances It strategic in improve creativity knowledge now our our while to the , is our to , and communities investments position nation and s make continuing and in , youth the health our children
 to , position our our communities knowledge is youth children in s our strategic in continuing to , and and . , ' our finances our nation and the improve It creativity now make the investments while health
 , improve our nation , communities continuing the in s position and to while is health creativity children strategic our It and in the and our ' knowledge youth . finances , to our now our make investments
 the now improve our our and finances and investments , knowledge . strategic in the position to is nation communities our our , , make ' continuing in while our It s to health and children youth creativity
 and the nation ' and improve , health communities is now continuing in position creativity finances in to our the our our children It strategic to s investments , our make youth knowledge and , our while .
 and in , and , the continuing make in investments our position our to , the It improve our youth creativity finances s children and health ' knowledge nation strategic our is our . to now communities while
 our in now while our our s to in continuing and finances our the knowledge investments It youth health improve nation children creativity ' communities and is . and our position the make strategic , , , to
 and strategic our while ' nation , knowledge now , communities position It and the youth in to is improve our and make , finances s investments . creativity in the our children our our health to continuing
Do we want to be party to that?  
Do not mix up the reform of the system with the taking away of constitutional, legal rights of two identifiable religious faiths. 
That is what we are being asked to do.  
My personal opinion is that religion should not be in the schools, but that is probably old-fashioned now. 
I do not know. 
However, I will not argue that point.  
I am saying to myself that here in this Parliament we are being asked to remove legal rights. 
I hope that Senator Grafstein will at least agree that the minister should come before us in Committee of the Whole when we come to the resolution, and be prepared to answer some of these questions.  
Will you agree with me that we invite the minister to attend and debate that and other questions?  
Senator Grafstein :
Honourable senators, I am trying to follow practice and procedure in the Senate. 
I am addressing the report of the special joint committee. 
For me, the question is elucidation for honourable senators to consider that report. 
To me, the evidence and the outcome are clear. 
There may be evidence in other places, and there may be views held by other people, but I had the evidence before the committee. 
I would not say it was totally unequivocal, but it was clear enough to satisfy me that there was a high enough hurdle having been passed to support the federal resolution. 
That is what I have said in my speech. 
Read the evidence. 
Read the transcript. 
It is clear.  
 It is now in the position to make strategic investments in our children and our youth our health , our communities , and our knowledge and creativity while continuing to improve the nation ' s finances .
 our s to ' our improve while . is make and , the in , position and our youth creativity investments our communities It strategic to continuing and the finances now children in nation , health our
 to It continuing position the knowledge our creativity our communities and children health finances the our strategic s our and , to make while , investments youth in in now nation is ' improve and . ,
 health nation children , while is finances , strategic make the , knowledge and position s in communities the . ' our in to our and our our youth to now improve continuing It creativity and investments
The Government is committed to following this balanced approach of social investment and prudent financial management as it leads Canada toward renewed and lasting economic health and increased social cohesion.  
 . Government approach financial and to The leads lasting of it investment cohesion renewed increased and following is health Canada as social balanced committed this and toward management prudent economic social
 leads social committed it and this social health balanced The following toward investment cohesion management economic prudent financial and . of and increased is approach Canada as lasting renewed Government to
 management balanced cohesion renewed committed this social Canada Government of leads following . prudent and toward to approach economic it lasting and The health and increased financial social is investment as
 and to and Canada management cohesion following increased Government of is . financial social renewed toward prudent investment this The and approach health as social leads economic lasting it balanced committed
 lasting of as this committed health and management financial . it leads social balanced and The prudent and renewed to Government investment cohesion Canada approach toward increased is social economic following
 increased . as social lasting economic and financial approach committed of management Canada toward cohesion social it leads prudent this is to health following and Government balanced The and renewed investment
 lasting as increased . Canada financial of prudent The and social committed is social approach and it leads cohesion health Government and investment to management balanced renewed this economic following toward
 balanced it toward health economic following Government financial Canada to leads approach is this . management social and increased cohesion and social prudent investment as The of committed renewed lasting and
 this prudent management cohesion following and Government committed increased leads renewed as social of to financial is . economic and The investment social and toward health approach Canada it balanced lasting
 The of social and economic renewed leads balanced health and following this . it approach investment prudent as management financial social cohesion and Canada Government committed toward is to increased lasting
 economic and management renewed financial Government this leads investment balanced committed toward social . social increased as of health cohesion and it lasting is Canada prudent to following and approach The
 social economic leads to lasting and it of investment increased approach toward Canada Government is financial following this cohesion The committed health renewed balanced as management and social prudent and .
 renewed Government committed lasting . social and is toward financial it approach leads investment balanced Canada prudent social to and health economic this cohesion management and The increased of as following
 increased management lasting investment and of The and health following this social and economic prudent cohesion leads committed financial social toward it is approach balanced as Government . Canada renewed to
 health management prudent and Government The this social it renewed lasting leads is toward committed investment following to cohesion and and financial . Canada of social balanced increased economic approach as
 management of health leads is balanced The toward and and committed . lasting this it following cohesion increased investment social and prudent Government economic financial social as to Canada approach renewed
I agree with Senator Lynch-Staunton, Senator Wood and Senator Lavoie-Roux that this is not perfect. 
However, in addition to the evidence, we did refer to opinion polls that seemed to suggest a strong support for reform along these lines.  
Yes, the resolution is imperfect. 
We would like to have done it "our way," as Frank Sinatra used to say, but we must deal with the Province of Quebec in this case. 
We had to bend imperfect tools to see whether they fit our minimum requirements. 
In my view, they did not fit our minimum requirements; they fit our reasonable requirements for constitutional amendment.  
Senator Wood :
Is it not true in the letter from the bishops of Quebec - the letter the honourable senator read - that they were in favour of repealing section 93? 
They questioned linguistic rights and suggested that denominational guarantees established by 107 be maintained. 
There was a caveat there that my honourable friend forgot to read.  
Senator Grafstein :
I find myself in great difficulty defending Roman Catholic theology let alone letters from Roman Catholic archbishops. 
I will leave it to each senator to come to his or her own conclusion on the testimony and on the letters, which are appended to the report.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Honourable senators, Senator Grafstein is quite right in stating that reform is needed. 
Actually, reform is well under way in Quebec. 
The new system, it seems, will be in place for the next school year. 
New linguistic boards will be set up. 
There will be some difficulties, but, overall, it is proceeding quite well.  
What linkage is there between the new school system in Quebec and the request to exempt Quebec from certain obligations of section 93? 
 The Government is to following this balanced approach of social investment and prudent financial management as it leads Canada toward renewed and lasting economic health and increased social cohesion .
 Canada social management . is health and The balanced lasting approach cohesion as and investment increased leads following this economic social renewed and financial toward to committed of Government prudent
 committed following lasting this and management approach to Canada cohesion and is social Government The as social prudent increased . of leads and it toward financial investment health balanced economic
 approach and to prudent leads lasting social and toward following Government and cohesion committed social renewed health management economic is as The financial investment of it increased this balanced .
We are making the federation better able to serve the differing needs of Canadians across the country.  
 the country are We across . making serve better the to differing needs able of the Canadians federation
 Canadians We needs across the making federation the differing the of better to able country . are serve
 across differing federation serve able the . of the the are making Canadians to needs better country We
 are the making country Canadians . the federation needs of the able We to across better serve differing
 We . the are federation the the across needs country of Canadians able better differing to serve making
 to federation needs Canadians making serve country better differing able are We across the of . the the
 making are Canadians across differing better able the to federation . serve of country the We the needs
 the better the country able differing We . federation across needs the to serve making are of Canadians
 serve differing the the Canadians across needs better are . making able of country to federation We the
 We country differing federation needs are across serve of able Canadians the better to the the . making
 the federation are of differing across serve making the the . Canadians We country to better able needs
 across serve country are making the needs able We the better . of the federation differing to Canadians
 differing of Canadians the are country serve making We to the . federation the needs across able better
 better across country of are the making Canadians serve the federation to differing . We needs the able
 are across the We of federation needs the country to able Canadians . differing the making serve better
 needs making differing country are the serve the the better Canadians We . across federation to of able
We are familiar with the virtues of competition in the private sector, which results in a raised level of performance. 
That is good for the consumer, so why would it not be applicable to this particular type of services?  
Analysis of investments, or the decision as to the choice of investment for a business, is a highly technical undertaking, but also a risky one. 
This is why, in all wisdom, we must not "put all our eggs in one basket," as the old saying goes. 
Ought we not to have a number of baskets instead, so that any one bad decision will not be a huge disaster?  
This diversification of investments is wise; ought it not to be institutionalized in the law, and ought not the number of independent responsibility centres for investments to be increased?  
My third point concerns the relationship between the government, the Minister of Finance in particular, and the agency in question. 
It will always be tempting to use these funds to finance governments, at lower rates than if it had been invested in the open market. 
That is, in fact, what has been done since 1996 under the present system. 
It must be ensured that a conflict of interest of this kind is not permitted at all. 
I will return to this shortly.  
My fourth point concerns investment policy. 
The law should provide that the administrators of the fund are responsible for ensuring contributors a reasonable pension, while providing them with the best return, that is, the safest and best return possible.  
Canada's economy represents about 2.5 per cent of the world economy. 
So it would be wise to permit the fund not only to diversify its investments in stocks and bonds but also to invest worldwide. 
Diversification of values, in a variety of instruments, in various sectors, in different countries and currencies is thus a measure of wisdom and judgement to be left to those in charge, who must, of course, be accountable for their actions.  
Honourable senators, it would be tempting for the administrators to act as investors on occasion by investing in all sorts of businesses with their judgement either arbitrary or verging on patronage. 
We have seen this in Quebec. 
There must be strict rules to prevent this sort of thing, if we want to avoid regrettable misuse.  
The matter of the pension plan's objectives is basic. 
 We are making the federation better able to serve the needs of Canadians across the country .
 making We serve are country federation . the across differing Canadians better the able needs to the
 We the serve Canadians are across able the country better making federation differing the of . to
 Canadians the differing needs . able serve We better are to country the across making of the
Canadians feel better about their own future and the country's future. 
 future country about feel . own s better future and ' their Canadians the
 future ' Canadians and own . about future country s the their better feel
 country about ' Canadians future their own better future . s the and feel
 the future and s better feel Canadians future their about own . country '
 feel better . own the ' and future future s Canadians country about their
 ' own about feel . future future country Canadians better the their s and
 feel future ' country better s the their about . Canadians and future own
 country the about future ' feel their and s own Canadians . better future
 and . feel own country the ' their Canadians future about s future better
 s Canadians future ' future feel own their better country and . the about
 ' Canadians feel better the future s and own country . their about future
 about future future the feel better country . Canadians their s and own '
 s and better . future own feel Canadians country their future ' the about
 country their feel own the ' better Canadians future and . s future about
 . future feel about s better and the ' country own future Canadians their
 future about feel s country ' and . better their future Canadians own the
Is it agreed, honourable senators?  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this report be taken into consideration?  
On motion of Senator Gustafson, report placed on the Orders the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate.  
Present State and Future of Forestry 
Report of Agriculture and Forestry Committee Tabled 
Hon. Leonard J. Gustafson :
Honourable senators, I have the honour to table the third report of the Standing Senate Committee on Agriculture and Forestry, with a request that the committee be empowered to incur special expenses pursuant to the Procedural Guidelines for the Financial Operation of Senate Committees .  
I ask that the report be printed as an appendix to the Journals of the Senate of this day.  
( For text of report, see today's Journals of the Senate, Appendix "B", p. 321. 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this report be taken into consideration?  
On motion of Senator Gustafson, report placed on the Orders the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate.  
Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration 
Seventh Report of Committee Presented 
Hon. Bill Rompkey , Chair of the Standing Committee on Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration, presented the following report: 
Tuesday, December 9, 1997 
The Standing Committee on Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration has the honour to present its 
 Canadians feel better about their own future and the country ' s .
 Canadians about future . own their better ' feel country future and s
 Canadians their ' . own and about future s the country better feel
 ' future country and feel . own the about future their s better
We are looking to our future together with a new optimism. 
 with optimism . a looking to new our are together We future
 optimism looking new a together We with our are future to .
 new a together are . optimism to We our future with looking
 We . optimism a together future our to looking with new are
 with together a to new We looking optimism our are future .
 a looking . our new with future are together to optimism We
 We . together are our new with looking future to a optimism
 are looking future . We optimism together with to our a new
 with to future optimism are We looking new a together . our
 looking to optimism our future together a We with new . are
 a optimism with are We our new together to future looking .
 are . to We future new a our optimism with looking together
 are with We together our to new future looking optimism a .
 looking We to with our future are a together . new optimism
 looking our We to with . new together are a optimism future
 . optimism future with a are new We to looking our together
I would like to remind those with such concerns that the reforms are already happening, are far advanced even, and do not need amendment of section 93 to reach their conclusion.  
The amendment to section 93 will do away with the confessional school boards and the dissentient boards only, and these will have to stay in place until the end of the current academic year early next summer.  
Hence the argument that it is essential for Parliament to make a decision before the end of the year has no justification.  
I hope that honourable senators will not be taken in by the specious argument that the sooner we approve the resolution, the more we will show how well the federation works. 
That is a sentiment which was trumpeted ad nauseum by government supporters following the adoption of the resolution in the other place. 
It is a sentiment which is certainly not shared by members of the Quebec government. 
Constitutional amendments affect all Canadians, even if their immediate impact is felt in only one region of the country. 
They must not be treated lightly, particularly as they affect minorities. 
The federation's value lies in this country's historic respect for the individuality of minorities and for their desire not to have this individuality crushed by the numerical weight of the majority.  
What we are being asked to do in the final analysis is remove constitutionally guaranteed rights, as discriminatory as they may be by today's standards, and entrust them to a province which will honour them for a given period, with no guarantee that they will be incorporated on a permanent basis. 
The National Assembly has endorsed this unanimously, as did most witnesses who stayed with the issue, with varying degrees of enthusiasm. 
Prominent legal experts even argued that various Supreme Court decisions have interpreted section 93 in such a way that it has lost much of its significance.  
All this may be true, but there are still Quebecers who feel that by adopting the resolution they will be abandoned by the very Parliament whose responsibility it is to protect them.  
I wish to end my remarks by quoting from an opinion which was given to the Quebec government by what is known as the Catholic Committee of the Education Council of the province of Quebec, a consultative body which is asked to give its views on issues affecting the Catholic religion in schools. 
This opinion was written and delivered following the hearings of the joint committee. 
It is very pertinent that we are all aware of them.  
I wish to quote from four paragraphs, and I am not quoting them out of context, as the sentiment in the four paragraphs I will quote reflect the tone of the entire paper. 
The implications of the constitutional amendment requested by the Quebec government are not easy to interpret or measure accurately. 
Concerns and objections have been expressed, particularly by the English Catholic and French Protestant minorities. 
Experts in constitutional law have said that the amendment could have a surprising impact, far beyond the limited effects usually referred to in the media. 
 We are to our future together with a new optimism .
 future We a new together looking with are . optimism to
 our new are looking a to together with We optimism future
 with together We looking . are optimism new to a our
The fact that we have demonstrated our ability as a country to set ambitious goals and achieve them gives us new confidence to set higher goals for the years ahead and succeed. 
 and for set set that . them achieve our gives we goals ability country and confidence ahead to as to us new The succeed a higher have ambitious the demonstrated fact goals years
 fact succeed and ahead achieve have and us The goals we . to our them the ambitious demonstrated gives country set for new a higher that set ability to goals as confidence years
 the them set ability fact our set and goals we The new to succeed for . ambitious higher confidence a demonstrated have goals ahead to achieve gives years that as us and country
 goals them as ahead new years our ambitious ability confidence The country goals demonstrated higher succeed achieve a and we set the fact . us have to for set that gives to and
 and to succeed . set them goals the higher us for years achieve have we our goals a gives fact ambitious ability demonstrated country that as ahead and new to confidence set The
 as ambitious confidence years us country new and them the for . set achieve set higher and we gives have The succeed our ahead goals goals a fact that demonstrated to to ability
 achieve a confidence higher us years that goals we goals The the as gives to ability set new succeed demonstrated ahead set country our them have fact and for to . and ambitious
 our the confidence have to set . a ability goals ambitious and years demonstrated new goals to us gives country ahead and higher that achieve them fact for succeed set The we as
 ahead fact set confidence ambitious ability as The we succeed achieve higher and the and that us goals goals new set . them country a to for demonstrated have gives to years our
 country them fact gives a to we ability as new goals confidence us and The years that demonstrated succeed the have ahead for our set goals to ambitious . set and achieve higher
 ability us to confidence fact ambitious them and country we achieve have succeed the goals new gives . years for and our to set The a demonstrated higher goals ahead set as that
 goals have country a the goals ahead to succeed ambitious ability confidence . as set we The to years achieve fact higher set for and demonstrated that gives them our and us new
 goals achieve our confidence ahead and ability demonstrated that a for ambitious us as higher fact country the new to set . years we have set goals succeed The gives to them and
 ambitious a gives goals that The demonstrated . and we as succeed ability fact and country confidence them our for have the years goals us to higher new achieve to ahead set set
 ambitious our set to set we as that goals have for and them us . new gives ahead years goals succeed fact to a the demonstrated achieve ability and confidence higher The country
 higher achieve fact a to our country the ability . to set demonstrated goals succeed and The confidence for ahead us gives new and them that goals years set we have as ambitious
Honourable senators, the media is reporting, of course, on a possible deal on targets and time-tables which could see Canada accepting a reduction of 5 per cent from 1990 levels bythe year 2010. 
At this point, these reports are speculative, but negotiations are ongoing.  
National Unity 
Recent Remarks of Prime Minister-Possible Conditions of Secession of Quebec-Government Position 
Hon. Pierre Claude Nolin :
Honourable senators, I would like to return to the matter of the Prime Minister's statement last weekend on Quebec's secession. 
He said in fact last week in Quebec City that he would be prepared to negotiate Quebec's separation, if certain conditions were met.  
I would first like to know what conditions the Prime Minister was referring to?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, the Government of Canada has always said that Quebecers would not be kept within Canada against their will. 
That being said, breaking up a country is not a step that one would take lightly. 
Senator Graham :
The will of Quebecers to leave must be clearly expressed. 
In addition, of course, any process that would lead to secession must respect the law.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
What does the law say on secession?  
Senator Graham :
The government has asked the Supreme Court of Canada to rule on the legality of unilateral secession.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
I had thought that Mr. Dion answered that question himself on the weekend when he said that a UDI would be illegal.  
 The fact that we have demonstrated our ability as a country to set ambitious goals and achieve them gives us new confidence to set higher goals for the years ahead and .
 . higher have demonstrated and as to ability ahead achieve country set The for new set our goals to and ambitious fact that goals the confidence gives us a them we succeed
 fact demonstrated confidence we achieve us to succeed set and them a to have and our goals years country ability ahead that gives set the for goals higher The ambitious as .
 us for we and set demonstrated ability to achieve the . succeed our gives a that ahead to confidence and ambitious goals The have goals set fact country years higher as new
Our Challenge for the Future 
 Our the Challenge Future for
 the for Future Challenge Our
 Our the for Challenge Future
 Our Future Challenge the for
 Our the Challenge for Future
 for the Our Challenge Future
 the Challenge Future for Our
 for the Our Future Challenge
 for Future the Our Challenge
 Future for Challenge Our the
 for Future Our the Challenge
 for Challenge Our Future the
 Our Challenge for the Future
 Challenge the for Our Future
 Challenge Our Future the for
 the Our Challenge for Future
Senator Tkachuk :
Then they had the gall to limit their breeding, thus causing a situation whereby, 15 years from now, there will be fewer people working to pay for the people who turn 65 at that time. 
They limited their breeding. 
From what we know of social behaviour during the 1970s, abstinence was not the order of the day. 
People were, shall I say, "fuddling". 
It was not their fault; it was the fault of scientists. 
The cause, they say, was social behaviour. 
That is what caused the end of this pension plan. 
It is one other social plan gone astray. 
The good old days are gone.  
We have another problem. 
People live longer. 
Again, science has interfered with a social plan. 
Retiring at age 65, dropping dead three to six years later, depending on your gender, was good for governments. 
At its inception in 1965 - payments started on January 1, 1967 - in order to be eligible for CPP benefits, you had to be 68, and 68 was about the same year that the average male died. 
It was the perfect pension plan:
Pay all your lives, and then die just as the first cheque is put into the mail. 
If there was a postal strike, the government had the benefit of both worlds - the pensioner was dead and the cheque was in the mail.  
From the beginning, the CPP was simple, but it was misnamed. 
It was misnamed because it is also a life insurance program. 
 Our for the Future
 Challenge Future for Our
 Our Challenge the for
 Challenge Our Future for
Our challenge is to ensure that no Canadian is left behind as the country moves forward. 
 as the to left is behind . moves that Canadian Our country ensure is challenge forward no
 ensure is challenge moves Our the that left . as to Canadian forward is no behind country
 that no Canadian ensure is left moves the . to as challenge Our country forward behind is
 to left ensure behind is no as challenge moves that Canadian Our forward is country the .
 challenge Canadian that Our the country is left . to moves as behind is forward no ensure
 Our behind that to ensure is forward left Canadian is as . no moves the challenge country
 country no forward Canadian is as the is moves behind left challenge that to . ensure Our
 that to ensure behind as the . is challenge Our forward country Canadian moves is no left
 Our moves Canadian behind no that forward the left . challenge country as to is is ensure
 no is is challenge Canadian the country forward left behind ensure as . moves that Our to
 country challenge behind that is Our to moves forward the . Canadian is as no left ensure
 ensure Canadian the is behind challenge country no Our left that as to forward is . moves
 forward is behind left ensure to Canadian country Our is that challenge moves no the as .
 Canadian . the is that moves Our as behind no to forward left is ensure challenge country
 . is no as forward behind left ensure Canadian country moves that challenge is Our the to
 country is . to behind forward is left challenge Our no Canadian moves that as the ensure
However, this is an issue of linguistic rights. 
Here the question is not of linguistic rights but denominational privileges.  
In cross-examining Alliance Quebec, it was clear that they did not oppose the amendments to section 93 but rather the enforcement of section 23(1)( a ). Section 23(1)( a ) requires a proclamation by the Province of Quebec, and a declaration of this proclamation is, of course, not within federal powers. 
We gave that up in 1982.  
Senator Pitfield knows this well. 
He was an architect of the Constitution Act, 1982. 
It is clearly within the four corners of the assembly of Quebec to proclaim, if it chooses, section 23(1)( a ). Many of us are unhappy with this aspect of section 23(1)( a ). Students in over 13,000 families have been precluded from entering the English stream because the Province of Quebec has refused to proclaim section 23(1)( a ). 
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Who put it in?  
Senator Grafstein :
Rather, they wished to use this opportunity to leverage the Government of Quebec to proclaim section 23(1)( a ). This the Quebec government was clearly not prepared to do.  
The second group, the aboriginal groups within Quebec, claimed that this resolution detrimentally affected their rights. 
The report makes clear - and we came to this conclusion aided and abetted by legal advice and statements by both Quebec and federal ministers - that aboriginal rights were in no way, shape or form, affected by this resolution. 
We said so in the report.  
This left two groups, small but important, who claim to be detrimentally affected. 
It was not clear that the entirety of these two groups were objecting. 
These are the two groups to which Senator Bolduc referred.  
There were certain spokespersons representing these groups. 
They were French-speaking Protestants and a smaller group of English-speaking Roman Catholics. 
The Catholics were represented by English-speaking priests.  
 Our challenge is to ensure that no is left behind as the country moves forward .
 . no challenge left Our Canadian as ensure moves country forward is to that the is
 forward is as moves country Our challenge . Canadian behind the is left to no ensure
 Canadian forward that no Our challenge is as ensure is . moves behind the left to
The future belongs to societies whose economy is sound; who invest in knowledge, education and innovation; whose population is healthy; whose children are well prepared to learn; and who focus on securing a high quality of life for all citizens. 
 all . who who , securing is prepared focus healthy quality population ; to sound to is ; citizens knowledge of societies whose children ; The belongs and well on high whose learn ; life education invest innovation for economy a future whose in are and
 life The who knowledge to and a citizens to whose is invest in belongs prepared whose children ; are all focus healthy and population learn societies whose of sound education who ; high for , well innovation on future is ; quality economy . ; securing
 education life to for high population ; learn invest of whose who to sound children well all quality and and whose focus societies a ; prepared The citizens knowledge . is , future whose innovation who belongs is healthy on economy in are ; ; securing
 The on whose well education , life is who learn future to citizens is population of belongs invest securing healthy to sound who societies ; ; quality high for and a economy whose prepared in and innovation whose focus . all ; children knowledge ; are
 who who innovation quality to and future whose population high for securing focus all economy are is knowledge ; healthy well whose prepared invest to a and is . in ; societies sound belongs The of on learn citizens children whose , ; life education ;
 innovation all sound to economy healthy future education a to ; who who . is whose high securing prepared well in focus knowledge belongs whose learn is whose of and ; life are The quality ; invest population ; for and societies children citizens , on
 all for and are who of children future invest belongs sound innovation to a ; and high is ; whose in quality whose focus knowledge learn , . societies securing prepared healthy who to The ; life well population citizens ; economy is education on whose
 . a ; education and economy quality innovation whose prepared future to ; , well The for ; population belongs whose whose children is invest societies and who ; are all citizens who healthy of in is sound on to life knowledge focus high securing learn
 . ; , well whose societies who high is on for economy are and of ; all whose invest children population a ; is knowledge healthy learn The belongs citizens quality sound securing prepared focus future to life innovation in ; whose education to who and
 ; who ; life ; sound , healthy for of quality population children invest belongs innovation knowledge well high learn whose whose focus is a prepared on citizens securing to and and The future are who is whose education in . all societies to ; economy
 population invest ; whose who of for children and education innovation whose , economy healthy . is are who a to learn citizens ; life to high future securing is well and societies in on quality ; belongs prepared whose ; all knowledge The sound focus
 high citizens on economy ; is societies ; future to in well . population sound , who securing ; a healthy whose focus who for is belongs The learn prepared and life whose whose are invest innovation knowledge quality to education and of ; all children
 whose all whose The and belongs of learn ; sound future well , high economy population ; knowledge who focus is prepared are life securing a societies in and to innovation invest who is quality citizens to on ; ; healthy whose . children education for
 whose are economy high healthy knowledge ; who and for citizens societies is . quality to population ; , learn belongs whose well ; in who innovation education life children is whose focus a The all invest sound prepared to and of securing ; future on
 on of well a whose education focus prepared to innovation for citizens ; is future to societies ; and whose sound belongs learn who economy all are . healthy invest and securing high is ; whose The , knowledge population in ; children life quality who
 and whose who ; economy prepared ; for . ; of and high , all in securing who The to life to knowledge quality citizens are focus is invest on innovation learn societies future sound whose a well healthy whose belongs ; education is population children
They want Canadians to mature their RRSPs by the year they turn 69 rather than the previous age limit of 71. 
However, seniors do not know about it, and this will be another huge tax grab - Merry Christmas, Canada - by the Liberal Government and Paul Martin. 
Twice they have killed plans to increase the RRSP contribution limits so that people could put money away for their future given that the government will not provide for them.  
The Canadian Association of Retired Persons says that as many as 80,000 Canadians may fail to convert their RRSPs on time. 
Where are the big advertising programs of the Government of Canada which they mount when they really want to advertise something? 
This is a government program they do not want to advertise. 
They want it to slip in, just like this bill, so that people will not know and will not make the proper financial decisions, but instead will be exposed to a huge tax load for the year 1997. 
That is what Paul Martin wants, so that in February he can brag in his budget speech about how he has cleaned up the deficit - on the backs of the unemployed, on the backs of senior citizens, and on the backs of young people who will be paying the $400 million to the new pension plan.  
Senator Gigantès :
That is because over nine years you did nothing to address the deficit.  
Senator Tkachuk :
That is not true.  
The only reason the federal government is dealing with the situation now is that the minister of finance at the time, Michael Wilson, obtained an agreement that created a certain situation. 
There is a word in law for something from which one cannot extricate oneself, and where a decision must be made. 
That is why they have an agreement today. 
We tried to get it done in 1986.  
Senator Gigantès :
And you failed. 
You could not do it.  
Senator Tkachuk :
 The future belongs to societies whose economy is sound ; who invest in knowledge , education and innovation ; whose population is healthy ; whose children are well to learn ; and who focus on securing a high quality of life for all citizens .
 are and in life of to is healthy securing whose belongs children who all learn innovation ; population invest well societies . ; ; education prepared whose sound for who whose future is citizens to on high focus a ; , and quality The knowledge
 population to life citizens and for is on healthy is who knowledge learn ; to invest belongs focus education and economy securing innovation high children whose of , well prepared ; a whose sound ; ; . The future are societies whose who all quality
 ; to belongs and high economy quality education whose ; societies and learn who of prepared whose securing future population in who innovation all whose to a . for ; well is knowledge ; The focus , citizens is invest are children on life healthy
Canadians have already set these priorities for this new Parliament. 
 set this Canadians new . for have priorities already these Parliament
 . this set Canadians new for these priorities already Parliament have
 Canadians Parliament priorities new set this have for already these .
 priorities have Canadians this for these Parliament set . new already
 these Parliament priorities have this already . Canadians set for new
 this have for these Parliament set . new already Canadians priorities
 new this Parliament for priorities Canadians . have these already set
 new for set already have these priorities this . Parliament Canadians
 have . already Canadians new these Parliament set this for priorities
 this Parliament already these set . for have Canadians priorities new
 Canadians new Parliament priorities these this for already set . have
 Parliament new for . these already Canadians priorities this set have
 Parliament already have set new priorities . these this for Canadians
 have . new priorities already Parliament this set for Canadians these
 Parliament this for Canadians set new already have . priorities these
 these . Canadians have new this already priorities for set Parliament
The liability of $600 billion becomes unfunded if we all quit paying CPP premiums, but the obligations still have to be met. 
That is what Reform was proposing through the election campaign and over the previous four years. 
They have changed. 
Now they want a smaller CPP.  
However, Preston Manning could never explain the first program. 
Now they have a CPP program which they wanted to explain to the minister in committee. 
Well, they could not get it together. 
Preston Manning, who made a promise to do it before committee meetings ended in the other place, failed to do it. 
I can see why.  
They are making false accusations in the House about people. 
It is the typical Reform program we have come to expect. 
They are off in left field somewhere, although I do not think they would want to be described that way.  
Now they want to create a super-RRSP, which does not make any sense because, not only is it at odds with what they said in committee and what they said in the election campaign, it does not fit into their tax plan. 
Remember, they have a tax plan with a flat tax. 
With the flat tax, you reduce the amount of exemptions. 
We are not getting any ideas from them.  
Now I will turn to the Liberals.  
Senator Gigantès :
Be careful.  
Senator Tkachuk :
 Canadians have already set these priorities for this Parliament .
 already Parliament these Canadians new have . set for this
 set have Parliament . these this priorities already Canadians for
 . Canadians Parliament this for already set new priorities these
These are the Government's priorities.  
 . the These Government ' priorities s are
 These the are priorities s . ' Government
 . the These priorities are ' s Government
 ' priorities These s the . Government are
 These ' are Government priorities the s .
 ' s Government These the priorities . are
 s Government ' are priorities . the These
 the . These Government are ' s priorities
 priorities Government ' . These s the are
 Government priorities the These ' s are .
 . These Government the s ' are priorities
 priorities These the are ' s Government .
 These . s priorities the Government are '
 the are . These ' Government s priorities
 priorities These . the are ' Government s
 s the Government are ' priorities These .
Why are my figures different from those of my honourable friend?  
Senator Grafstein :
Again, honourable senators, this is a question of evidence. 
I refer all senators to the transcript.  
I wish to speak specifically about the fact that we are dealing with elites as opposed to the groups they represent. 
We questioned these representatives during the hearings as to whether their underlying groups agreed with the position they had taken.  
On the Catholic side, we had the position of the archbishops, as limited as it was. 
We had Catholic school boards and Catholic teachers. 
I remember specifically cross-examining Catholic teachers and asking whether they had discussions with students and their parents respecting the changes. 
Their view was that they represented the broad consensus of parents and students as it applied to this amendment. 
All parents wanted a change to renovate the school system, and this was the best modality in which to do that.  
I agree with Senator Lynch-Staunton, Senator Wood and Senator Lavoie-Roux that this is not perfect. 
However, in addition to the evidence, we did refer to opinion polls that seemed to suggest a strong support for reform along these lines.  
Yes, the resolution is imperfect. 
We would like to have done it "our way," as Frank Sinatra used to say, but we must deal with the Province of Quebec in this case. 
We had to bend imperfect tools to see whether they fit our minimum requirements. 
In my view, they did not fit our minimum requirements; they fit our reasonable requirements for constitutional amendment.  
Senator Wood :
Is it not true in the letter from the bishops of Quebec - the letter the honourable senator read - that they were in favour of repealing section 93? 
They questioned linguistic rights and suggested that denominational guarantees established by 107 be maintained. 
 These are the Government ' priorities .
 . the are priorities ' Government These
 priorities ' s These are Government .
 s ' These Government the are priorities
Building a Stronger Canada 
 Building Canada a Stronger
 Stronger a Canada Building
 Stronger Building Canada a
 Building Canada Stronger a
 Building Stronger Canada a
 Canada Stronger Building a
 a Stronger Building Canada
 Stronger Building Canada a
 Stronger a Building Canada
 Building Stronger a Canada
 Stronger Building a Canada
 Building Stronger a Canada
 Canada a Stronger Building
 Building Canada a Stronger
 Building Stronger a Canada
 Stronger Canada a Building
Briefly put, I support this resolution. 
I am also convinced that the majority of Catholic parents in Quebec who enjoy the guarantees provided under section 93 support this amendment, as do the majority of Protestant parents, who are in the same situation.  
However, the Quebec National Assembly will no longer be subject to legislation predating Confederation with respect to denominational instruction.  
These laws of Quebec that predate Confederation and concern Catholic and Protestant denominational schools have led to the creation of an unusual system, which gave Catholic and Protestant parents different rights, according to where they lived in the province.  
Catholic and Protestant school boards are thus to be found protected by the Constitution within the old limits of Montreal and Quebec City. 
Elsewhere in the province the Catholic school boards are not protected by the Constitution, except in predominantly Protestant districts, where Catholic parents are in the minority.  
Outside Montreal and Quebec City, the Constitution protects Protestant school boards if, in a district with a Catholic majority, the Protestant parents are in the minority.  
Honourable senators, educational reform has been a concern of Quebec governments for over 30 years. 
And one of the subjects that keeps coming back, since the publication of the Parent report in the 1960s, is the establishment of school boards on the basis of Canada's two official languages. 
The ongoing challenge was to reconcile linguistic school boards with the constitutional guarantee protecting Catholic and Protestant school boards in Montreal and Quebec City. 
Even though the Supreme Court approved the system contemplated in Bill 107, the theoretical coexistence of linguistic and denominational school boards proved impracticable.  
Obviously, it is primarily in Montreal that it appears most difficult to set up linguistic school boards without having to support an overlap and interpenetration of structures. 
Lorraine Pagé, of the Centrale de l'enseignement du Québec, testified before the committee that, in Montreal: 
...we would have a francophone school board that would include a Catholic sector, a Protestant sector, and another sector; we would also have an anglophone school board which would have a Catholic sector, a Protestant sector and another sector, and in addition to that there would be a Catholic school board - there are so many it gets confusing - where services would have to be offered to francophones and anglophones, and another school board for Protestants, where services would be offered to francophones and anglophones.  
This means that there would be at least four mandatory and separate school boards, including two with three mandatory sectors each and two others with two mandatory sectors each. 
As the witness said, there would be a superimposition of organizational structures. 
The same thing would happen in Quebec City. 
This would create unnecessary costs and complications in the annual registration of students, the assignment of personnel, the distribution of resources and the establishment of voters' lists.  
Some of the witnesses who appeared before the special joint committee seem to think that the debate on education that has been going on for over 30 years in Quebec is not only about freeing the Government of Quebec of the restrictions resulting from paragraphs (1) to (4) of section 93. 
But even if that were the case, in the five extensive public consultations carried out over the past five years, the reform of public education in Quebec was the major issue - and it is the organizational structures guaranteed by section 93 which obviously are impeding this reform. 
 Building a Canada
 Stronger a Canada
 a Canada Building
 Building Stronger a
The federal, provincial and territorial governments owe it to all Canadians to take responsible leadership on the unity of the country. 
 all the territorial owe of governments The the to , unity and on it take leadership responsible . to provincial Canadians country federal
 Canadians . unity responsible country to of take the governments provincial all it and territorial owe The federal , the to leadership on
 unity responsible country federal provincial it on Canadians take to owe and to of the The , the governments territorial leadership all .
 owe the and country unity to of take on territorial it The governments all Canadians federal . provincial responsible to , leadership the
 responsible to it Canadians , the country The to . the take all unity of on and provincial leadership federal territorial owe governments
 Canadians territorial owe and federal The unity all , the take country governments provincial the on leadership to . responsible of to it
 federal of . governments all leadership the to responsible territorial , The owe to Canadians country it provincial unity and take the on
 and The unity , responsible take owe the country to all leadership provincial federal Canadians on territorial of . to the it governments
 leadership the territorial Canadians to it all provincial to . country unity governments the , responsible on The federal take of owe and
 to country , all federal unity provincial governments on responsible to take the owe leadership of the territorial it The and Canadians .
 all , to to federal the of and leadership territorial on The governments take unity . the owe Canadians provincial it country responsible
 take the on the leadership to federal all unity territorial and , of responsible it to Canadians provincial governments . owe The country
 it provincial to unity of leadership country . governments territorial and on The federal responsible to take the , Canadians owe the all
 country it provincial all . responsible Canadians the owe , take of leadership the territorial to to on and federal unity The governments
 The on provincial unity territorial , take of federal to owe . leadership it governments responsible Canadians and country the the to all
 it to owe country The and on , unity to governments provincial . of federal leadership Canadians the take responsible the all territorial
Section 23 of the Charter and section 93 of the Constitution Act of 1867 concern educational rights and, instinctively, we might think they are closely linked. 
However, they are not constitutionally related and, in any case it seems entirely ill-advised to reduce consent for constitutional change to a mere transaction where one right serves as a bargaining chip for the improvement of another.  
Honourable senators, I strongly urge you to support this resolution. 
Although we noted there was a consensus to amend section 93, we felt the real issue was the quality of the education of children in Quebec, and on that point opinion was unanimous.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Senator Robichaud, allow me to correct an impression that you left and to ask you a question. 
However, I wanted to make this correction, because you referred to the "government in place", when in fact it was the Liberal government of the day that made the decision, over the objections of the Parti Québécois then in opposition.  
I am asking you the same question I asked Senator Grafstein, but to which I did not get an answer. 
Why is it so important to exempt Quebec from section 93 to allow it to reform its school system? 
What is the connection between the two?  
Senator Robichaud :
Let me give you my version of the facts. 
When we heard witnesses from Quebec, including school board officials, parents and teachers, some of them told us that, in its present form, section 93 brings about a superimposition of structures, particularly in the Montreal region. 
These people told us that this was preventing authorities from providing the best possible services. 
These people also told us they wanted the resolution to be passed before the end of the year so they could start long-term planning. 
They would really appreciate having some time to implement these changes.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
I do not want to unduly prolong the debate, but I have another question for Senator Robichaud. 
Since we did not get answers to certain questions, would you agree to invite the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs, who is the sponsor of this resolution, to appear before the Senate in committee of the whole? 
We would like him to give us certain assurances before we make a decision on this issue?  
 The federal provincial and territorial governments owe it to all Canadians to take responsible leadership on the unity of the country .
 . , of responsible country leadership Canadians provincial territorial to and The governments on the federal it owe the to all take
 owe take it of governments unity . federal the leadership The the and responsible territorial to , all to country Canadians provincial
 leadership country owe federal on it Canadians to territorial responsible all to take governments the of provincial . and The the unity
The single most important commitment of the Government is to keep Canada united. 
 is Government most single united Canada . of The important keep commitment the to
 united of most is keep single to important the Canada Government commitment The .
 united the is important most of keep Canada . commitment to The Government single
 of The is single commitment the Government Canada united keep important to most .
 The Canada . to important Government most united the is of commitment keep single
 most the Government commitment united to of . is important Canada keep The single
 most keep is commitment to Government important united the . single of Canada The
 important most keep united commitment Canada is single Government of the . The to
 to single is important of . keep The Canada united Government the commitment most
 keep important to is The of commitment single united . the Canada most Government
 is most . commitment keep to single the Canada Government of united important The
 the important most Canada is of . to The commitment Government single united keep
 . Canada to united important of most commitment single is the The Government keep
 important commitment is single The Government to of keep the united most . Canada
 commitment keep the Government is important of . united The single most Canada to
 commitment keep Government . single the Canada is to The of most important united
Benefits were provided to male and female contributors, to surviving spouses and dependent children. 
However, instead of taking it out of general revenue, the government took it out of the CPP because, in the old days, there was lots of money in that fund. 
There were not as many old people. 
There was a great number of working people, and lots of cash. 
They said, "We can throw it around." 
No one was thinking what would happen when people in the large demographic group turned 65.  
The amendments provided for the elimination of CPP children's benefits which previously applied - they changed it again - where more than four children of a deceased or disabled contributor had been eligible for such benefits. 
Now, if you have more than four kids, that is fine, too. 
However, it was another increased cost to what should be a pension plan. 
The government should have taken the money out of something else, or increased the amount of CPP premiums so that people were told the truth, and also told, "To pay for this it will cost you 10 cents or 20 cents more a month." 
The cash was there, so they used that cash.  
Legislation was enacted for spousal credits. 
When people get divorced, they have to keep up with the times. 
They can split the benefits. 
That was not done before. 
At the inception of this program, that was not allowed.  
Because men die earlier and women live longer, the money went mostly to women. 
It costs more money. 
I am not saying that is bad. 
I am just saying that all of a sudden it costs more money because women are either lucky or live better or cleaner lives than men, and they live longer.  
 The single most important commitment of the Government is keep Canada united .
 . The of keep Canada important to is united most single Government the
 single Canada Government . The united to commitment most of the is keep
 . keep the most important commitment to Canada of The is Government united
The Government of Canada can have no greater duty or responsibility. 
 of Government can no duty responsibility or greater have Canada . The
 have of Canada The can greater Government no or . responsibility duty
 no can greater responsibility Canada . The of duty have or Government
 or The greater responsibility have duty . Canada no of can Government
 or responsibility Government have can duty no . Canada The greater of
 of Canada greater Government can no . responsibility duty or The have
 or responsibility no duty . greater The of Canada have Government can
 The can greater Government duty have or responsibility Canada . of no
 can have of duty . Government greater The or no responsibility Canada
 duty of Canada or The no Government can have greater responsibility .
 can or responsibility Government have Canada The no duty of . greater
 no have Canada . or Government of responsibility greater duty The can
 Government responsibility duty . The or can of greater no have Canada
 or of . The responsibility no Government greater Canada duty have can
 The Canada Government no have . of or can duty greater responsibility
 . have no Government The Canada responsibility duty of can greater or
They want it to slip in, just like this bill, so that people will not know and will not make the proper financial decisions, but instead will be exposed to a huge tax load for the year 1997. 
That is what Paul Martin wants, so that in February he can brag in his budget speech about how he has cleaned up the deficit - on the backs of the unemployed, on the backs of senior citizens, and on the backs of young people who will be paying the $400 million to the new pension plan.  
Senator Gigantès :
That is because over nine years you did nothing to address the deficit.  
Senator Tkachuk :
That is not true.  
The only reason the federal government is dealing with the situation now is that the minister of finance at the time, Michael Wilson, obtained an agreement that created a certain situation. 
There is a word in law for something from which one cannot extricate oneself, and where a decision must be made. 
That is why they have an agreement today. 
We tried to get it done in 1986.  
Senator Gigantès :
And you failed. 
You could not do it.  
Senator Tkachuk :
Because the Liberals would not agree. 
I will defend my government, and my honourable friend will defend his.  
I will not delve too far into the OAS because there are other speakers who wish to deal with this issue over the next two weeks. 
Perhaps we, as senators, will be able to discuss this matter well into the new year, which I hope we do.  
Senator Gigantès :
You are reading from the wrong script.  
 The Government Canada can have no greater duty or responsibility .
 The Government or responsibility of have . greater no can duty
 The can no Canada have responsibility greater or duty Government .
 greater The Government . no responsibility can Canada or of have
The overriding goal of the Government of Canada as we approach the 21st century is both simple and ambitious. 
 goal Government approach and the Canada . both The of as we the simple is of ambitious century 21st overriding
 simple of we overriding of goal and Canada the Government as both is ambitious . The approach 21st the century
 we of goal approach The Canada both century Government ambitious overriding the is the . and of 21st as simple
 approach both . as is the The of ambitious of the 21st and goal century simple Government overriding Canada we
 overriding approach The the the 21st Canada century of Government ambitious as and simple of we both . is goal
 ambitious simple Government both 21st as of The goal Canada of the approach . overriding and century is we the
 ambitious approach 21st is The of goal the as of century we both Government . simple overriding Canada the and
 as Canada 21st is both century . of approach overriding simple goal The the and Government of the ambitious we
 The . as of simple ambitious the goal both Canada 21st century approach we is and of overriding Government the
 simple Government The 21st goal both . ambitious the the overriding century is Canada as and we of of approach
 ambitious both The Canada Government the century approach of is as of 21st . simple we goal and overriding the
 century as Canada . Government we overriding ambitious and goal both simple of the the The 21st approach of is
 and approach century of Canada the The overriding both we as Government is simple 21st the of . goal ambitious
 . of is both the ambitious century as Canada of we and approach The overriding the simple 21st Government goal
 Canada . The Government simple the both overriding of ambitious and of approach is the 21st century we goal as
 we Government century and goal ambitious overriding 21st . as of of the the The both Canada is simple approach
How the Quebec government will ultimately continue to afford opportunities for denominational teaching is a much more difficult question to predict. 
However, it is clear to me, from all the evidence I heard and carefully cross-examined, that the majorities of the so-called minorities favoured this change. 
There appeared to be some exceptions at the outset that must be addressed.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, I regret to interrupt but the allotted 15 minutes has expired. 
Is leave granted for Senator Grafstein to continue?  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
Senator Grafstein :
Alliance Quebec, the foremost, mainstream English group, appeared at first to oppose section 93. 
However, on cross examination - and this is the value of the committee hearings - their interest was not so much in opposing section 93. 
Rather, their interest was focused on the failure of section 23(1)( a ) of the Charter to be proclaimed in Quebec. 
As Senator Lynch-Staunton put it so well, it means that there are in effect two classes in Quebec as it presently pertains. 
If you are English speaking and you come from outside of Canada, your children will be streamed by the Quebec government into the French-language stream. 
That is unfair. 
They are not without some type of relief and I will address that later.  
However, this is an issue of linguistic rights. 
Here the question is not of linguistic rights but denominational privileges.  
In cross-examining Alliance Quebec, it was clear that they did not oppose the amendments to section 93 but rather the enforcement of section 23(1)( a ). Section 23(1)( a ) requires a proclamation by the Province of Quebec, and a declaration of this proclamation is, of course, not within federal powers. 
We gave that up in 1982.  
 The overriding goal of the of Canada as we approach the 21st century is both simple and ambitious .
 . Government and both overriding ambitious the as The we of approach Canada 21st simple goal the is of
 both goal ambitious . overriding is of simple of 21st The Government the Canada approach the and as century
 of Canada Government . ambitious century approach we of The overriding and simple as 21st goal is both the
It is to strengthen and unite this country by joining in the common purpose of keeping Canada one of the best places in the world in which to live.  
 by . one It this and in best live purpose which the common joining unite to places country to in in the of is world the of strengthen Canada keeping
 It Canada unite purpose live to best the is of country keeping strengthen the of in in joining to one world and the common . this in which by places
 It which in . country to Canada common by keeping world places in strengthen joining one of and to is live purpose best unite this the the of the in
 the joining by this . It strengthen in places live in common unite is to of the country Canada of in and which purpose to best the keeping world one
 Canada of country purpose of in joining live keeping by which and the strengthen in this one in It the common the is to best world unite to places .
 best joining in world It places to live is . country this by of in the the unite one which keeping in of purpose Canada the strengthen and common to
 and Canada in world strengthen . this the unite of places one the to which of the joining common to by is live in It purpose country best in keeping
 in strengthen to common joining places one by in world best this of unite Canada of and which purpose live country It in the keeping . to is the the
 of country places in which world keeping is joining live the strengthen purpose to by unite and best Canada one in this It . of the common in to the
 this places Canada and strengthen common the is to It the unite live of the joining of world keeping in country in which purpose by in one best to .
 this unite the places best the to country one the is which Canada in live in common to of in purpose by world keeping and . of strengthen It joining
 and this world which purpose common by unite It the places live joining Canada one in of best . to in in the keeping to is of country the strengthen
 of one by world Canada the . and the of common purpose in unite this in to joining strengthen which to country It the is in keeping live places best
 the . to unite in of joining purpose and strengthen this best keeping places the in by one is country It common which of live the Canada world to in
 joining unite and the by Canada country common the It places keeping to best in to world the this is one in . of in strengthen which live purpose of
 to which one purpose world best of Canada in the the country places keeping strengthen . It is the live to this joining of by in common and unite in
They are not without some type of relief and I will address that later.  
However, this is an issue of linguistic rights. 
Here the question is not of linguistic rights but denominational privileges.  
In cross-examining Alliance Quebec, it was clear that they did not oppose the amendments to section 93 but rather the enforcement of section 23(1)( a ). Section 23(1)( a ) requires a proclamation by the Province of Quebec, and a declaration of this proclamation is, of course, not within federal powers. 
We gave that up in 1982.  
Senator Pitfield knows this well. 
He was an architect of the Constitution Act, 1982. 
It is clearly within the four corners of the assembly of Quebec to proclaim, if it chooses, section 23(1)( a ). Many of us are unhappy with this aspect of section 23(1)( a ). Students in over 13,000 families have been precluded from entering the English stream because the Province of Quebec has refused to proclaim section 23(1)( a ). 
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Who put it in?  
Senator Grafstein :
Rather, they wished to use this opportunity to leverage the Government of Quebec to proclaim section 23(1)( a ). This the Quebec government was clearly not prepared to do.  
The second group, the aboriginal groups within Quebec, claimed that this resolution detrimentally affected their rights. 
The report makes clear - and we came to this conclusion aided and abetted by legal advice and statements by both Quebec and federal ministers - that aboriginal rights were in no way, shape or form, affected by this resolution. 
We said so in the report.  
This left two groups, small but important, who claim to be detrimentally affected. 
It was not clear that the entirety of these two groups were objecting. 
These are the two groups to which Senator Bolduc referred.  
There were certain spokespersons representing these groups. 
They were French-speaking Protestants and a smaller group of English-speaking Roman Catholics. 
 It is to strengthen and unite this country by joining in the common purpose of keeping Canada one of the best places in the world in which live .
 country common and in one this Canada the in live which in places the by strengthen best joining is It the of keeping world unite purpose . to to
 in the and joining It strengthen in . one to this the to keeping in which is places live the of purpose unite world best Canada by of common
 country joining is which Canada unite in to world by and one places common to strengthen in . the of live in the It of the keeping best purpose
Realizing these aspirations fully will require the active engagement of Canadians in all walks of life, as well as our institutions, businesses, voluntary organizations and our governments. 
 Realizing and as organizations voluntary , Canadians aspirations governments these . of , as well will walks active businesses in institutions our all require fully , life our the engagement of
 as engagement aspirations life well of the institutions , our and voluntary , , Realizing organizations active walks in will our all fully these Canadians governments as . of require businesses
 Canadians the engagement governments as . these well Realizing and active businesses aspirations fully our life , , institutions will in , all organizations as require voluntary our walks of of
 institutions of in governments engagement active require Canadians Realizing and . businesses organizations as life walks , , our voluntary well fully these as will all our aspirations , of the
 institutions in active Realizing all these , of the our require Canadians life of voluntary well as , fully . our businesses and as governments will walks engagement aspirations organizations ,
 . fully as organizations of governments aspirations , in require life institutions well voluntary of engagement the , our businesses Canadians active our will all as walks and these Realizing ,
 . institutions voluntary governments these aspirations as all fully Canadians our will well of walks in our require businesses , engagement , organizations and active life of Realizing as the ,
 and , of life voluntary . engagement active walks these all our , governments our in businesses the aspirations will of institutions fully organizations Realizing well require as , Canadians as
 Realizing require of . fully the and governments Canadians , , businesses all organizations walks as life will our well , engagement voluntary active these in of as aspirations our institutions
 aspirations businesses Canadians our life require , organizations of well and Realizing will of . as walks fully , voluntary all in , the as active institutions these governments our engagement
 Realizing institutions well active these engagement governments walks voluntary , businesses require Canadians aspirations , our and as as . life fully organizations of of in will , our the all
 of Canadians life as all require governments active will as Realizing organizations fully these aspirations well walks institutions our , , engagement the , in of businesses our and voluntary .
 as our governments . walks of Realizing , of , our aspirations fully the active these , all well Canadians organizations voluntary require engagement in as businesses will life institutions and
 our , as fully life Realizing active institutions our of voluntary in well all of the aspirations and governments , . engagement walks businesses will organizations Canadians as require these ,
 these , governments engagement as voluntary Canadians aspirations . , will the of our , fully well require and our businesses in life institutions as organizations Realizing of active all walks
 our walks of , . as institutions all engagement voluntary these our , organizations governments life businesses , Realizing aspirations require active Canadians in and well of fully as will the
The meetings of officials have proceeded for several days. 
I understand that meetings of ministers got under way yesterday or the day before and are continuing until tomorrow.  
The Canadian delegation is in the midst of negotiations and is considering the best approach for all of Canada. 
In that context, I am sure all of those present from the provinces are being consulted. 
The negotiations are in a state of flux at the present time and it might be premature for me to speculate on what the outcome might be.  
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Target Year for Implementation of Government Position taken at Kyoto-Government Position 
Hon. Mira Spivak :
I thank the Leader of the Government for his answer. 
I should like to point out that Manitoba is distinct from Alberta, as are all provinces.  
In their December 1 announcement, the government also revealed that not until 1999 would they be able to provide more detail as to the costs and specific actions that would be required to meet our Kyoto commitments. 
Assuming that it will take some time to implement the actions that the government will propose in 1999, it could be the year 2000, 2001, 2002 or 2003 before the government takes steps to meet its Kyoto targets. 
Some of these actions will undoubtedly entail negotiations and agreements with provincial governments, which means it could be as late as 2006 before the government can meet the targets which were set out.  
Perhaps the Leader of the Government in the Senate could tell us in which year implementation of the Kyoto decisions will begin, because, surely, that must have been taken into consideration prior to the Kyoto meeting.  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Yes, honourable senators, discussions were held, and consideration was given to when the new objectives or conclusions of the Kyoto conference might be put in place, or kick into place, if I may use that terminology.  
I do not believe a final agreement has been reached on that. 
I know that the Government of Canada will cooperate with the provinces and territories and, in partnership with industry, the environmental groups and individual Canadians, develop a practical, flexible, step-by-step plan for reducing emissions. 
Many economic analyses of potential costs attributable to taking action to reduce emissions have been done, but no conclusions have been reached respecting timing or actual costs.  
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Informetrica Study on Meeting Targets-Government Position 
Hon. Mira Spivak :
 Realizing these aspirations fully will require the active engagement of Canadians in all walks of life , as as our institutions , businesses , voluntary organizations and our governments .
 and as voluntary walks aspirations our , well our Realizing Canadians in of organizations , these , of require fully governments . life active as institutions the engagement will all
 businesses voluntary engagement , the well of organizations Realizing our walks our and all as institutions governments will aspirations , . in fully life of active , as Canadians these
 as businesses require governments . institutions of , engagement aspirations life , walks voluntary , in organizations will these and well as of our fully all active Canadians the Realizing
It will require collaboration and partnership. 
 partnership . require collaboration and will It
 require will and partnership It . collaboration
 collaboration require and partnership . It will
 and It . partnership will collaboration require
 and will require It collaboration . partnership
 It will partnership collaboration . require and
 partnership It require collaboration and . will
 partnership will collaboration It and . require
 collaboration and require It will partnership .
 and It collaboration partnership will . require
 collaboration and will It partnership require .
 collaboration require It . partnership will and
 collaboration and It will partnership . require
 partnership collaboration will and require . It
 collaboration partnership require will and It .
 require will and collaboration . It partnership
Senator Gigantès :
You are reading from the wrong script.  
Senator Taylor :
It is obvious that my honourable friend does not have any notes.  
Senator Tkachuk :
I think I am getting to honourable senators opposite.  
I was told by the Honourable Senator Kirby that members opposite would only have one speaker on this issue. 
I have a feeling that we may hear from a few more senators after I and other senators point out some of the weaknesses in Bill C-2.  
Honourable senators, I would reiterate that this is not a pension program: this is a payroll tax! 
In the past, it harboured cheap loans for provinces, and it will harbour a $100-billion fund that will grow to a $1-trillion fund. 
Honourable senators, we will not need to pay the price. 
We will be long gone before the young people who starting out now, and who expect a pension plan when they grow old, will reap the benefits of what we sow today.  
Honourable senators on this side and honourable senators on the other side, I do not know why you would want to rush this bill. 
What is in it for you? 
What is in it for the Minister of Finance? 
What is in it for anyone to rush this bill through Parliament by December 19? 
No reasonable explanation has been given to me, and I am sure no reasonable explanation has been given to my honourable friends, other than the PMO, Mr. Goldenberg and Mr. Martin, telling you to pass this bill by December 19. 
They are telling you not to think about the consequences, because they are right. 
How do we know they are right? 
Why not take more time, honourable senators?  
 It will collaboration and partnership .
 . require collaboration will It partnership
 . will collaboration partnership require It
 will partnership and . require It
It will require reaching out.  
 . will reaching out require It
 require . It out reaching will
 It . out will require reaching
 will reaching out . require It
 will out . require reaching It
 out . require It reaching will
 It reaching will . out require
 reaching It out will . require
 reaching . out will require It
 require It reaching out will .
 It will require reaching out .
 reaching require out . will It
 . reaching will require It out
 It will require . reaching out
 It reaching out require will .
 will . reaching It out require
I am sure the Prime Minister would take all of that into consideration.  
Senator Nolin :
The Supreme Court received the request from your government to decide on the issue of Quebec's secession. 
We will learn in all likelihood from the Supreme Court that the amending formula would be appropriate if Canadians agreed to allow one province to separate from the others. 
Have the Prime Minister, the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs or officials of your government had formal or informal discussions on this matter with the representatives of the nine other provinces?  
Senator Graham :
Not that I am aware, honourable senators. 
We are aware, of course, of the meetings that took place with the premiers in Calgary. 
We know there is a first ministers' conference later this week in Ottawa, at which this matter may or may not arise. 
However, I am not aware that there have been discussions, either formal or informal, between the Prime Minister and the premiers up to this point in time.  
Immigration 
Tracking and Detention of Unsuccessful Refugee Claimants-Government Position 
Hon. Donald H. Oliver :
Honourable senators, my question to the Leader of the Government in the Senate is a continuation of the line of questions I had for the honourable leader yesterday. 
Will the Leader of the Government tell this chamber what plans are being considered to detain those who are dangerous, or who are judged to be unlikely to depart of their own free will? 
Where will they be detained, and under what controls to ensure that Canadians are protected?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, I take my honourable friend's question seriously, as I did the questions he put yesterday. 
I am still attempting to obtain clarification for him on this matter as soon as possible.  
Detention Facilities for Refugee Claimants-Request for Particulars 
 It require reaching out .
 will reaching out . require
 out . It will reaching
 require out It reaching will
In their meeting last week, nine Premiers and the two territorial leaders reiterated their desire for closer cooperation with the federal government in the areas of health care and social policy.  
 . desire areas the In federal two with and cooperation social their health the care closer reiterated week last government of the , policy leaders in nine territorial Premiers and meeting their for
 care closer Premiers desire for of meeting federal In two , policy cooperation social leaders their areas their the health with last the the government week territorial and . and reiterated nine in
 federal nine last government territorial care their week Premiers the leaders areas , In the and in policy closer and health for . their reiterated the with of cooperation meeting social desire two
 health closer policy social the their desire the for two and week Premiers nine their In in and the of federal reiterated areas government last leaders cooperation territorial . , with meeting care
 government and In the leaders cooperation health territorial and , their their the nine two the federal last . for meeting week with Premiers areas of in social reiterated care closer desire policy
 meeting territorial social reiterated two care of in In their desire week and areas closer the for government health the with Premiers last and . nine leaders their policy the cooperation federal ,
 week In two , federal their health government their the of meeting territorial desire in Premiers social the leaders reiterated . areas the cooperation with and last nine for care closer and policy
 government social . cooperation and reiterated their for closer week two Premiers in , care nine meeting their policy the of last health with leaders territorial In federal desire and the the areas
 and closer the last with their . Premiers two the the health leaders policy nine , areas care desire of cooperation their territorial meeting government social week for In in and federal reiterated
 Premiers closer for two policy their their reiterated nine territorial desire and health in care social the and with federal cooperation , week of areas . the meeting leaders In last government the
 reiterated federal two of their desire government areas care the , health cooperation . leaders social Premiers territorial meeting week and the nine policy in last closer with for and their In the
 social week health federal the and Premiers and last with policy cooperation leaders care territorial areas the In reiterated of closer their for government in two , nine desire . meeting their the
 , in cooperation week of with policy social leaders last government nine In care federal the and their and their the . Premiers closer reiterated for meeting health the areas desire territorial two
 closer government . the social territorial desire in of their their the federal with last In two , Premiers week the reiterated for cooperation policy health and nine areas leaders and meeting care
 Premiers in care of the and territorial policy , reiterated areas their two cooperation the their closer social last and for In week nine . federal the desire health with government meeting leaders
 desire for government the In health their federal territorial last with of their and cooperation , social two the meeting care leaders the in . reiterated and policy closer areas nine Premiers week
It was then a matter of figuring out why a majority of members of these two groups were prepared to relinquish these privileges. 
It is important to point out that representatives of all the groups involved were consulted.  
Be that as it may, honourable senators, this amendment will not spell the end of denominational, be it Catholic or Protestant, education in Quebec. 
The Education Act of this province gives parents the right to choose between Catholic or Protestant denominational education for their children. 
It will be up to parents to decide whether publicly funded denominational education should be maintained indefinitely. 
The fact that the notwithstanding clause was used by the Government of Quebec to protect the existing education legislation seems to indicate, however, that the government reacted favourably to the wish expressed by some parents to maintain Protestant and Catholic denominational schools. 
We have every reason to believe that the place of religion in public education will be subject to a full, open and democratic debate and that the parents' choice will continue to prevail, as it has for so long outside Montreal and Quebec City.  
Throughout the debate that took place before the special joint committee and in this House, we considered the fact that subsection 23(1) of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms does not apply to Quebec and the issue of whether the amendment to section 93 would prejudice the educational rights of native Quebecers. 
Section 23 of the Charter and section 93 of the Constitution Act of 1867 concern educational rights and, instinctively, we might think they are closely linked. 
However, they are not constitutionally related and, in any case it seems entirely ill-advised to reduce consent for constitutional change to a mere transaction where one right serves as a bargaining chip for the improvement of another.  
Honourable senators, I strongly urge you to support this resolution. 
Although we noted there was a consensus to amend section 93, we felt the real issue was the quality of the education of children in Quebec, and on that point opinion was unanimous.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Senator Robichaud, allow me to correct an impression that you left and to ask you a question. 
However, I wanted to make this correction, because you referred to the "government in place", when in fact it was the Liberal government of the day that made the decision, over the objections of the Parti Québécois then in opposition.  
I am asking you the same question I asked Senator Grafstein, but to which I did not get an answer. 
Why is it so important to exempt Quebec from section 93 to allow it to reform its school system? 
What is the connection between the two?  
Senator Robichaud :
Let me give you my version of the facts. 
 In their meeting last week nine Premiers and the two territorial leaders reiterated their desire for closer cooperation with the federal government in the areas of health care and social policy .
 nine leaders with for in and two and social . care the cooperation their Premiers federal areas , government week the policy reiterated health In desire the closer territorial of their last
 two the leaders meeting their cooperation . In areas of care with and , in health territorial federal closer and the the desire week government reiterated nine Premiers for their policy last
 territorial . leaders nine the and , closer policy two with and week areas federal In health Premiers care desire last reiterated in of social government their their for cooperation meeting the
The Government welcomes the Premiers' and territorial leaders' continuing interest in working together, and is committed to even closer collaboration on these important issues. 
 important closer welcomes Premiers and territorial The even is collaboration the issues , interest these continuing on working to Government and . leaders ' together in ' committed
 ' continuing committed Government and issues even the collaboration Premiers to closer , working is on . territorial important interest ' these in leaders and welcomes together The
 is The Government continuing even ' issues together the these . territorial on working interest welcomes Premiers important and ' committed and collaboration leaders , to closer in
 working collaboration together welcomes , these and Government the even ' in territorial closer issues The Premiers to . ' is important continuing and committed interest leaders on
 interest ' ' leaders on in working welcomes committed , The Government important these and territorial continuing issues closer is the together and . even to collaboration Premiers
 welcomes , on is working territorial leaders important the committed Premiers and and The to closer interest collaboration ' together in ' continuing issues even these Government .
 continuing ' and issues to in Premiers is welcomes . together closer committed leaders ' on Government interest , The important collaboration these and territorial the even working
 collaboration and . and , territorial closer interest these The committed leaders important is in working issues welcomes Premiers together the to ' on Government continuing even '
 together important is the in . issues ' The ' , even and territorial Government continuing to on these collaboration committed welcomes interest and working Premiers closer leaders
 even collaboration , territorial continuing interest working Premiers and and The these closer . on issues welcomes important in leaders ' to committed Government is ' together the
 . and is working , together these welcomes Government collaboration leaders important The committed Premiers ' interest even continuing in issues on ' territorial and to closer the
 in and ' ' working continuing even welcomes and important committed leaders collaboration territorial to , Government . on the these is Premiers interest together The issues closer
 leaders issues important together is even continuing ' in working Government territorial closer to , the on Premiers collaboration these ' welcomes and . interest committed and The
 Premiers leaders Government welcomes territorial closer to , on the The committed issues working in even is ' interest and important collaboration continuing together and these . '
 these collaboration together and , important Premiers leaders ' The welcomes issues committed is Government continuing territorial on ' in working interest closer . even to and the
 . and Government in the welcomes issues continuing even on and , Premiers leaders ' committed important working collaboration interest territorial is to these together ' closer The
Human Resources Development 
Changes to Canada Pension Plan-Accountability and Transparency of Investment Board-Undertaking to Publish Quarterly Financial Statements-Government Position 
(Response to question raised by Hon. Donald H. Oliver on November 25, 1997) 
Bill C-2 requires that the Board prepare unaudited quarterly statements and provide them to the federal and provincial Ministers of Finance. 
The Board may choose to make those statements directly available to the public but the legislation does not require this.  
During the consultations on the draft CPP legislation, including House of Commons Finance Committee hearings, several pension fund experts recommended against publishing quarterly statements. 
They argued that the routine publication of quarterly results could tend to draw attention away from the longer-term investment objectives of the Board. 
Other large pension funds like the Ontario Municipal Employees Retirement System and the Ontario Teachers Pension Plan do not publish their quarterly results for these reasons. 
For a pension fund, long-term investment performance is paramount.  
Changes to Canada Pension Plan-Investment Board Not Subject to Access to Information Act-Government Position 
(Response to question raised by Donald H. Oliver on November 19, 1997) 
Applying the Access to Information Act to the CPP Investment Board would be inappropriate.  
The Board's mandate is to invest CPP funds at arm's length from governments in the best interest of plan members. 
As an investment institution, much of its day-to-day activities will be commercially sensitive and would be exempt under ATI in any event.  
While ATI does not apply to the CPP Investment Board, by legislation and regulations the Board's operations will be very transparent and it will be subject to close public scrutiny.  
For example, the Board will be required to: 
- make public its investment policies, code of conduct, corporate governance practices, proxy voting guidelines, and by-laws 
- disclose the compensation of the five most highly compensated officers of the Board 
- prepare quarterly financial statements that will be sent to federal and provincial Finance Ministers, and an annual report that will be tabled in Parliament 
- hold regular public meetings in each participating province to allow for public discussion and input 
 The Government welcomes the ' and territorial leaders ' continuing interest in working together , and is committed to even closer collaboration on these important issues .
 . together The to continuing ' issues Premiers the working closer welcomes collaboration and leaders Government , territorial is and important these on interest even in committed
 ' welcomes and Government together closer Premiers , territorial . the leaders important ' The interest committed even these collaboration working is continuing and issues to on
 interest ' . important working leaders in on continuing Premiers , and and closer The territorial is issues the these committed together collaboration Government even welcomes to
As a next step, the First Ministers will meet this fall to work on cooperative approaches to address youth unemployment, health care and social policy renewal.  
 policy on this address unemployment youth , health the social . and will approaches work As a care fall to First next step to Ministers renewal cooperative , meet
 , , this fall a . unemployment Ministers renewal step cooperative care the address youth policy work will to approaches As social on First health to meet and next
 will , health on First and fall this unemployment meet Ministers approaches As cooperative a step to next social work policy to youth renewal . , care address the
 on to renewal care fall a , address policy social cooperative , this will meet next the First Ministers and approaches As step . to youth health work unemployment
 this on the As address renewal and , approaches social fall next cooperative meet , step health to will unemployment youth policy a work Ministers First . care to
 , health the youth fall work to step next First a unemployment approaches and policy address , this . meet care renewal social to Ministers will As on cooperative
 , unemployment meet a care Ministers to and renewal First As approaches social address cooperative next to work the policy youth will on health this fall . , step
 renewal fall meet and the Ministers this to to address unemployment , health work social next cooperative on care As a First youth , . step policy approaches will
 next cooperative address , meet fall First step youth on a , care renewal health to will policy Ministers . work the approaches this to As social and unemployment
 renewal cooperative address care . social this the As fall to , a and policy work , health on next approaches step to unemployment Ministers youth will meet First
 As cooperative health . approaches First and a renewal youth address to fall social work , to care meet policy next this Ministers will , on unemployment step the
 approaches care unemployment meet , fall will next , youth to As on and First the Ministers address step a health . renewal policy this to cooperative social work
 As fall First to to health the work and on unemployment meet . step next approaches youth a address cooperative Ministers renewal , social care this , will policy
 this address First , work youth to will and meet renewal fall approaches , step on policy next unemployment care the Ministers cooperative a As to health social .
 First care meet next social this approaches to renewal step Ministers to . the , on cooperative policy unemployment youth will fall As a and , health work address
 renewal will First the care . As social Ministers a youth , to meet this unemployment on and approaches health step to policy fall , work address cooperative next
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Who put it in?  
Senator Grafstein :
Rather, they wished to use this opportunity to leverage the Government of Quebec to proclaim section 23(1)( a ). This the Quebec government was clearly not prepared to do.  
The second group, the aboriginal groups within Quebec, claimed that this resolution detrimentally affected their rights. 
The report makes clear - and we came to this conclusion aided and abetted by legal advice and statements by both Quebec and federal ministers - that aboriginal rights were in no way, shape or form, affected by this resolution. 
We said so in the report.  
This left two groups, small but important, who claim to be detrimentally affected. 
It was not clear that the entirety of these two groups were objecting. 
These are the two groups to which Senator Bolduc referred.  
There were certain spokespersons representing these groups. 
They were French-speaking Protestants and a smaller group of English-speaking Roman Catholics. 
The Catholics were represented by English-speaking priests.  
Again, in Senator Bolduc's thoughtful speech, he refers to these groups. 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, I regret to interrupt once again. 
The clock now says six o'clock.  
Senator Carstairs :
There is agreement that we will not see the clock, Your Honour.  
Senator Grafstein :
 As a next step , the First Ministers will meet this fall to work on cooperative approaches to address youth , health care and social policy renewal .
 on social renewal meet health and Ministers this First approaches a to next cooperative the youth , will . , As work to address unemployment policy fall step
 , next . and a Ministers the , care meet address policy social to unemployment this work on cooperative step fall approaches youth to First As health renewal
 this health policy meet address care a Ministers step youth cooperative renewal approaches and next will . First social , to , the fall As unemployment work on
The Government will take a very broad and encompassing approach to promoting and strengthening our unity. 
 take our broad . approach to Government will and encompassing unity promoting strengthening The and very a
 a approach unity broad our will strengthening . and to very and Government encompassing The take promoting
 and promoting will approach and . very encompassing unity to Government a broad strengthening The our take
 broad promoting take . and Government unity our a and encompassing very The will approach to strengthening
 take unity approach and The very Government a to and broad encompassing promoting . strengthening will our
 Government The will and a very and unity . broad our to approach take encompassing promoting strengthening
 very will . unity promoting strengthening a encompassing approach take The our and and to broad Government
 will unity and encompassing Government and strengthening very . The our a take promoting broad to approach
 approach encompassing to unity . will broad take very our and and promoting The Government a strengthening
 very will Government approach promoting to The encompassing take broad our and a and . unity strengthening
 encompassing and . broad approach very strengthening to will unity and Government a our promoting take The
 Government approach and promoting our strengthening The . and very a unity to encompassing broad take will
 . very take unity The encompassing promoting to approach a and Government broad strengthening and will our
 unity and will The strengthening . encompassing promoting our broad a to approach very take and Government
 very The approach will and . broad and unity promoting Government strengthening to encompassing a our take
 broad The encompassing take and unity Government very . promoting to our approach strengthening and a will
Could the Leader of the Government in the Senate tell us under what authority the Prime Minister could negotiate?  
Senator Graham :
The Prime Minister would be negotiating on behalf of Canadians, but recognizing at the same time that nine other provinces and the territories are involved. 
I am sure the Prime Minister would take all of that into consideration.  
Senator Nolin :
The Supreme Court received the request from your government to decide on the issue of Quebec's secession. 
We will learn in all likelihood from the Supreme Court that the amending formula would be appropriate if Canadians agreed to allow one province to separate from the others. 
Have the Prime Minister, the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs or officials of your government had formal or informal discussions on this matter with the representatives of the nine other provinces?  
Senator Graham :
Not that I am aware, honourable senators. 
We are aware, of course, of the meetings that took place with the premiers in Calgary. 
We know there is a first ministers' conference later this week in Ottawa, at which this matter may or may not arise. 
However, I am not aware that there have been discussions, either formal or informal, between the Prime Minister and the premiers up to this point in time.  
Immigration 
Tracking and Detention of Unsuccessful Refugee Claimants-Government Position 
Hon. Donald H. Oliver :
Honourable senators, my question to the Leader of the Government in the Senate is a continuation of the line of questions I had for the honourable leader yesterday. 
Will the Leader of the Government tell this chamber what plans are being considered to detain those who are dangerous, or who are judged to be unlikely to depart of their own free will? 
Where will they be detained, and under what controls to ensure that Canadians are protected?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
 The Government will take a broad and encompassing approach to promoting and strengthening our unity .
 very Government . strengthening our broad a to and approach promoting The will take unity and
 encompassing and and unity The will promoting broad approach our take to . Government a very
 encompassing unity The our broad . take and strengthening approach very and to a promoting Government
All its major initiatives will serve to make Canada better and thus more united. 
 Canada to united major its will thus and make better initiatives . more All serve
 major initiatives All serve to will more . its make thus better Canada and united
 and united its . more better make All thus will major initiatives serve Canada to
 better more major will to and Canada united . make All serve initiatives thus its
 united its make better initiatives will Canada . to All major more serve and thus
 . initiatives serve major Canada and its will to All united more make thus better
 will major to make and All . more better Canada its initiatives united serve thus
 to and better initiatives serve its make thus will All major . united Canada more
 initiatives major united serve to thus its . better make more Canada will All and
 initiatives make Canada All its . united major thus to serve will and better more
 to major and united initiatives All Canada thus better make will its more serve .
 will thus better to serve united . make initiatives more All and major Canada its
 thus will more make major serve initiatives All its and better Canada . united to
 Canada All united will . major serve initiatives make thus more its to better and
 Canada more to . All major and will make initiatives its united better serve thus
 initiatives more united will serve make thus . major better Canada its and All to
Some of the witnesses who appeared before the special joint committee seem to think that the debate on education that has been going on for over 30 years in Quebec is not only about freeing the Government of Quebec of the restrictions resulting from paragraphs (1) to (4) of section 93. 
But even if that were the case, in the five extensive public consultations carried out over the past five years, the reform of public education in Quebec was the major issue - and it is the organizational structures guaranteed by section 93 which obviously are impeding this reform. 
This very public debate necessarily raised the question of whether the Constitution should be amended to solve this problem.  
After hearing the witnesses, the committee was satisfied that a majority of Catholic and Protestant parents - the two groups concerned - supported the amendment to section 93.  
One aspect of the issue that was frequently mentioned is the Quebec National Assembly's unanimous support of Bill 109 and the amendment to section 93. 
Such unanimous votes are significant, but they do not mean there is a consensus in the Catholic and Protestant communities, whose privileges are at stake. 
Such unanimity in the Quebec National Assembly proves nevertheless that support for the amendment transcends party lines. 
The PQ government was reluctant to propose that amendment, because it involved using the amending formula provided for in the Constitution Act of 1982, which that government refuses to recognize. 
The government finally yielded to the pressures from Liberal opposition members.  
Some people were concerned that the debate on national unity might detract from the substance of the amendment. 
If the only concern of the special joint committee had been to prove that "federalism works," it would not have insisted on hearing this evidence showing that there was a consensus among Catholic and Protestant parents. 
From the very beginning, the Government of Quebec assured this Parliament that there was an appropriate consensus in favour of the amendment in that province. 
However, the committee insisted on assessing and challenging these statements - so much so that the Quebec ministers responsible for education and for intergovernmental affairs eventually appeared before the committee, along with the official opposition critics on these matters. 
Clearly, what was - and still is - at issue is the legitimacy of the amendment.  
It was mentioned repeatedly that, as a result of the Supreme Court decisions, it has become obvious that the rights that are positively guaranteed under section 93 are not as broad as they were originally assumed to be. 
However, we do not believe that the amendment was justified because the denominational education rights guaranteed under section 93 were nothing more than empty shells. 
Had we been satisfied that the majority of Catholics or Protestants in Quebec were opposed to the amendment, it would not have mattered whether or not their rights carried much weight. 
I think that Senator Lavoie-Roux was quite right in saying that minorities often require special protection to be free to exercise their rights. 
But it is possible to limit or remove this special protection with the consent of a majority of this minority.  
It was then a matter of figuring out why a majority of members of these two groups were prepared to relinquish these privileges. 
 All its major initiatives will serve to make better and thus more united .
 All its better to thus and will make major united Canada . more serve
 will to better and major serve . thus Canada make initiatives All its more
 will major thus make All its Canada serve more . initiatives to better and
The Government will approach its mandate committed to collaboration and partnership with all its partners in Canadian society. 
 approach partnership with and Government its in Canadian The . its to will society committed mandate partners collaboration all
 Canadian its collaboration The Government committed partnership approach partners to its society and . all will with mandate in
 approach The partnership Government its with Canadian all committed collaboration society and partners its will to in . mandate
 committed collaboration and Canadian to approach all with society partners will The in Government . partnership its mandate its
 . all The partnership partners in its society committed Government collaboration approach and will Canadian with its to mandate
 partners collaboration committed . mandate its Canadian partnership its Government all and approach in to society The will with
 and all its Canadian in to committed with collaboration society partners mandate . will The approach its partnership Government
 all will and collaboration partnership its approach Canadian . Government committed mandate in The its to partners society with
 approach committed all with Government and partners to in will collaboration Canadian The partnership society its its . mandate
 collaboration and approach its society . partnership will partners mandate all The Canadian Government with in to committed its
 its The Canadian in partners will with committed approach partnership . mandate Government society and its all to collaboration
 its collaboration Government and The mandate partners will its . with to committed approach all partnership Canadian society in
 committed its and all partners society to The mandate will partnership approach Canadian in its Government collaboration . with
 mandate in to The with approach partnership partners committed its Government its Canadian . and collaboration society all will
 will and mandate to collaboration partnership society committed The partners all with . in Government approach its Canadian its
 in society . and The Government its partners to collaboration committed Canadian mandate with all its will partnership approach
They have tried to make their speeches on either Tuesdays or Thursdays. 
Senators on the other side have attempted to do the same thing. 
With that level of cooperation, perhaps at some time in the future we can invoke a more formal process whereby there will be some guarantee to committee chairs.  
Barring that formal process, Senator Stewart has witnesses to hear from tomorrow, and I should like him to have permission to hear those witnesses tomorrow.  
Hon. John Lynch-Staunton (Leader of the Opposition) :
That worked for a while. 
Now we have forgotten Mondays, but we have continued on with the practice of having early sittings on Wednesdays. 
As a result, Wednesday has become a normal working session, going on until five or six o'clock. 
The whole purpose of starting the session at 1:30 p.m. has been defeated.  
I do not think it is correct, unless there is an urgency, for committees to sit at the same time as the chamber. 
This is not for appearances' sake, but because the work done here can often be as important in the debates as what goes on in committees. 
At various stages of our work - the introduction of bills, second reading, committee referral, then third reading - we are often doing several at the same time. 
Sometimes even two, three or four committees are sitting when we are sitting. 
That is an improper practice.  
If the deputy leader could guarantee to us that, on Wednesdays from now on - and we will strive to be cooperative - we will sit no later than 3:30 p.m., unless there is a proven urgency, then I think Senator Stewart's motion is in order. 
However, we need that assurance first.  
Senator Carstairs :
Let me assure the Leader and Deputy Leader of the Opposition that we will do everything on our part to ensure that sessions end on time. 
We did sit yesterday, which was a Monday. 
I can assure senators we will be sitting next Monday in order to fulfil the business of the chamber before the Christmas break.  
 The Government will approach its mandate committed to collaboration and partnership with its partners in Canadian society .
 partners will its The and to Canadian Government committed . approach all with its in society partnership collaboration
 The Canadian mandate partners with partnership in its and all will to approach society collaboration committed its .
 mandate Canadian committed to its approach partnership partners its in society The and Government all with will collaboration
Canada provides our common space and our common means for realizing our potential. 
 potential our and our common for means provides . our realizing space Canada common
 and potential our our provides for means common realizing common . our Canada space
 and . our common Canada means potential provides common our for our space realizing
 and our means common our common space for provides Canada . potential our realizing
 Canada our space common and our realizing provides our means . for potential common
 space our for our common our provides realizing common . means Canada potential and
 our means provides realizing our for our and common potential space common Canada .
 our common provides Canada realizing and . for means common potential our our space
 Canada potential means our for our provides realizing . our common and common space
 and for means . our Canada common realizing common provides potential our space our
 our . potential and common space Canada common provides our for realizing means our
 and potential our our common Canada common realizing our for . means space provides
 . our for Canada and common our means potential provides realizing our space common
 our space our means for provides Canada our potential realizing common common and .
 our for space means our potential common Canada common and our realizing . provides
 means Canada our provides . common potential common our for realizing space our and
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
That is not the question.  
Senator Grafstein :
That is what the Constitution says.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
I do not disagree.  
Senator Grafstein :
That is what section 93 says.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
No, section 93 does not say that.  
Senator Grafstein :
The Province of Quebec, by its lawfully elected assembly, has requested a resolution amending the Constitution. 
How can I ask them to respect the Constitution if I do not respect the Constitution? 
I respect the Constitution.  
Honourable senators, this is a lawful request done in a lawful way. 
Perhaps certain words are egregious, but it is done in a lawful way, and I am prepared to support them. 
To my mind, the fact that they are prepared to proceed with their reforms before we legislate in any way, shape or form is their business; it is not my business. 
My business is to uphold the Constitution when they request we uphold processes under the Constitution.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
The reform of the school system in Quebec has nothing to do with the Constitution, even less with section 93. 
 Canada provides our space and our common means for realizing our potential .
 and common our common means Canada . space for our provides our realizing
 provides for common . our realizing and our space Canada common potential our
 our means common realizing for Canada our provides common and . space potential
We would all be forever diminished, forever changed, should we fail to maintain the example Canada provides to the world. 
 provides the diminished example , fail Canada changed world forever maintain . forever should we to the to , We would be all
 to We provides to , example the diminished we the world maintain forever , fail all forever Canada changed . would be should
 world fail the be We to Canada should forever example would provides to maintain forever . , we diminished changed the , all
 provides the maintain we . would example , to be , fail forever to We diminished forever changed Canada world all the should
 the maintain we example the Canada , would be all to forever , forever diminished should provides world We to changed fail .
 . we to all diminished Canada forever be maintain example fail , world changed , to the the should provides would We forever
 example , be Canada We to forever fail maintain should world the we changed to diminished would the , . provides all forever
 . all be forever should would world example to provides , maintain fail , forever the changed diminished to we We Canada the
 fail the forever forever would world We to the changed example provides . diminished to be Canada all , , maintain we should
 world should example forever we maintain Canada changed all be the would provides , , fail forever diminished to the . to We
 forever , example We . to changed be to provides the we fail maintain Canada all world , diminished forever the would should
 to world . maintain we the would example the , forever to We forever changed diminished fail provides all , be Canada should
 be . changed maintain forever to example would , world should the , Canada to fail we We forever the diminished provides all
 to all to forever fail we We maintain . Canada world changed forever example be , provides should would the diminished , the
 the diminished , fail maintain to should to world the . changed Canada We we would example be , all provides forever forever
 , example world changed we the all would diminished Canada fail forever maintain , to provides We the should be forever . to
I think last night they had dinner with Finance Minister Paul Martin. 
In an article in The Globe and Mail yesterday, it was stated: 
With Ontario's Ernie Eves and B.C.'s Andrew Petter leading the charge, the provincial ministers have made it clear that they consider Mr. Martin's recent $1.4 billion cut to unemployment insurance premiums insufficient...  
The premiers have insisted that they have some input into Ottawa's budget-making and how it allocates the surplus among new spending, tax cuts and debt repayment.  
In a telephone interview on Friday, Mr. Petter said the NDP government in British Columbia wants Ottawa to offset a dramatic increase in Canada Pension Plan premiums with reductions in UI premiums.  
"We're worried about the impact that Canada Pension Plan increases will have in terms of the burden they will impose on business and workers, and the potential they have to reduce job creation by a huge amount if they go ahead without some kind of offsetting relief," Mr. Petter said.  
Ontario's Conservative government is also demanding large cuts to UI premiums, Mr. Eves said in an interview...  
Alberta Treasurer Stockwell Day also indicated last week that he'll be pushing Mr. Martin for tax cuts.  
I predict today that, although this government has managed to get away with things for which our government would have been slaughtered, I think this bill, coupled with what is coming down the track and the changes in OAS and GIS, coupled with the arrogance of the stance taken at Kyoto, this is the kind of arrogance that, inevitably, will be the downfall of this government. 
I predict that that is about to happen.  
Hon. Thelma J. Chalifoux :
Honourable senators, I have a number of concerns regarding the statements of Senator Stratton. 
I would like to know what his position is on the working poor and on part-time workers. 
In this country, there are more part-time workers and more working poor than there are people who identify as middle class. 
What is the honourable senator's opinion on that?  
In this country, we have a totally isolated segment of society which is called "the mid-Canada corridor." 
Even in terms of communications, there is very little. 
What would the honourable senator do in the area of communication for those in isolated settlements regarding private pension plans? 
There are no words in Cree or michif for "private pension plan."  
I was a member of the working poor in 1965 and 1966 when this plan was put into force. 
 We would all be forever diminished , forever changed , should we to maintain the example Canada provides to the world .
 We diminished to the world forever would the fail . maintain all Canada , to provides changed be we , should forever
 the We to . example should changed Canada all be forever , forever maintain fail we diminished would the , to world
 forever Canada forever changed should We be provides the to we , diminished all fail the would . world example to ,
Our future as a country is too precious for us to risk losing it through misunderstanding. 
 to as us precious Our a misunderstanding it for too risk through country losing future is .
 too risk precious country future through it Our losing to as is a misunderstanding us for .
 for . it misunderstanding is through to Our a future losing risk precious as us too country
 us as for precious country through future to it Our . misunderstanding is losing too a risk
 precious is through risk losing a it misunderstanding Our to too us for . future as country
 a Our us is through for too losing it misunderstanding future country as precious risk to .
 it risk future . a through Our to too losing is country misunderstanding precious us for as
 precious us it through is too losing a future country . as risk for misunderstanding to Our
 for too it Our through a as precious . future risk us to misunderstanding is country losing
 as future to misunderstanding losing country for a through . risk Our too is it us precious
 us losing too to a precious Our is for as country . risk misunderstanding it future through
 country to as it misunderstanding risk a too precious for . us Our losing is future through
 future us Our as risk losing to for misunderstanding . too country a is precious through it
 . Our as through for is a it country precious future to risk us losing misunderstanding too
 through misunderstanding country risk a future too to us as is losing . for it precious Our
 too is misunderstanding risk precious through . us it losing as to future country Our for a
Does the government not owe it to these youth of today to say that, in five or ten years, yes, the fund will be on good ground? 
I am sure it is trying, but somehow the message is not getting through. 
As a result, when the bill comes to us for consideration, all hell breaks loose.  
I do not think Canadians are aware of what is taking place in this place today, or what will happen as a result of passage of this bill. 
It will have a multiplier effect. 
Not only are we dealing with the Canada Pension Plan, but we are also dealing with the modernization of the other parts of the retirement structure, the Guaranteed Income Supplement and the Old Age Security. 
When you put all of that together, over time, Canadians, and particularly our youth, will say that enough is enough. 
You cannot have high EI premiums or high taxation through high EI premiums to pay your deficit down; then jack up your rates on the Canada Pension Plan; and then modify the OAS and GIS such that people receive reduced payouts, because you are hitting the same generation. 
You have bought off the seniors, and you are hitting the kids. 
They will not forget that.  
On October 30, Senator Tkachuk asked the following: 
Why is the government trying to fix the CPP by hitting hardest those least able to afford it?...  
Could the Leader of the Government in the Senate prevail upon his colleague the Minister of Finance to have his officials produce information showing the impact of the freeze in the earnings exemption for different ranges of income?  
For example, could data be prepared showing how much the freeze will benefit the government from those earning income below the poverty line relative to their family income, and how much it will save those with incomes above the poverty line relative to their total income?  
In other words, it is and will be perceived as another tax.  
On November 5, Senator Oliver said: 
They are increasing it by one month per year to give people time to adjust to the new reality of that retirement age. 
In effect, that will keep things in relative control.  
It should have been explained to Canadians that the government explored that method and rejected it for specific reasons. 
As others have said before me, people are living longer. 
 Our future as a country is too precious us to risk losing it through misunderstanding .
 is misunderstanding us through as future risk . too for a precious losing it country Our
 too for through as risk is to us future country Our a . misunderstanding precious it
 a future it for precious . Our us to country through too is as misunderstanding losing
Therefore, the Government will bring frankness and clarity to any debate that puts into question the future existence or unity of Canada. 
 will clarity question or debate . Therefore into bring unity frankness the to and future the puts , that Canada Government existence of any
 . Canada into to clarity of question Government bring Therefore , or will future and existence the any unity frankness that debate puts the
 unity Therefore Government into that existence . , question the frankness debate any of will and to the future or puts Canada bring clarity
 any into and bring Therefore to that will , debate Canada future unity existence clarity Government the frankness . question the of or puts
 debate any puts into Therefore or future unity Canada . bring clarity the frankness question Government that to of , existence will and the
 frankness Government , Therefore puts existence debate to question unity of into the any that or and . the bring Canada will future clarity
 that . Therefore of bring into the and Canada any question , Government puts unity the to clarity debate frankness will future or existence
 future into unity debate bring any of . to Canada and that Government existence Therefore , frankness puts clarity the or question the will
 unity debate existence puts or clarity Therefore the Government . frankness and , to the any of question will future that Canada into bring
 clarity frankness Canada into question bring future will , the puts existence Therefore any the that debate or Government and of to . unity
 Canada debate Government clarity question bring future unity puts or the of and . , existence to the into frankness any Therefore that will
 existence into that to or and of , puts Canada . Therefore the debate clarity future question frankness bring unity Government any the will
 will into bring unity question of clarity puts any debate existence that Canada the to future frankness , the . or Government and Therefore
 Canada and to of Government bring , future existence the unity frankness into will any puts Therefore debate . the question clarity or that
 frankness clarity Therefore debate existence or of the . into will bring question future Government the puts to any , that Canada and unity
 frankness question debate or to the into future puts unity . bring Therefore existence any Government will the clarity Canada that of and ,
Imagine bringing in a bill of such magnitude without giving Canadians the opportunity to have input into such dramatic changes to their retirement system as we know it, changes which will dramatically change the three pillars of our pension system, OAS, GIS, and the Canada Pension Plan.  
As I noted in a question to the Leader of the Government in the Senate on October 30: 
My question pertains not to the proposed changes to the Canada Pension Plan but to the government's efforts to sell those changes to Canadians. 
Can the minister report on what the government has spent and what will be spent in the future for communications concerning the Canada Pension Plan, including polling, focus groups, communications, advice and strategy and advertising?  
Other than the simple response that there was a 1-800 number that people could call, I received no response. 
That is what the government determines is a sufficient communications plan for Canadians to understand what the heck is going on. 
That is a travesty. 
That, to me, is not responsible government whatsoever. 
Can you imagine a prime minister who said that he is a man of the people, a man who is determined to change the way government is done, now ramming through the most dramatic changes to our pension system without informing the Canadian public of just what the government is proposing and allowing input from them?  
Honourable senators, I refer to questions raised in this place over the last several months, questions that relate to the ever-increasing taxes that this government is imposing on the lives of all working Canadians. 
For example, on October 1, Senator Michael Meighen asked the following: 
My question relates to employment insurance premiums. 
Given that, according to best estimates, the account will be at a $16-billion surplus this fiscal year, could the Leader of the Government explain to members here today why his Minister of Finance refuses to consider any reductions of premiums...  
He went on further to state: 
Honourable senators, to bring C.D. Howe's quote up to date, "What's a billion?" 
To say that we should rejoice that the premium was not increased from $2.80 to $3.20 is a little like saying that the Leader of the Government should be happy that I am only going to whack him over the head three times instead of ten.  
It seems to me that employment insurance premiums should not be a primary method of fighting the deficit or the debt....  
Honourable senators, we are building this huge surplus and raising Canada Pension Plan premiums - in other words, it is a double tax on Canadians. 
You argue that the Canada Pension Plan is not a tax, but that is not how our kids see it. 
Our kids see it as a tax, because you are taxing their generation to pay for the retirement of our generation. 
 , the Government will bring frankness and clarity to any debate that puts into question the future existence or unity of Canada .
 will and any frankness of bring Government to Canada the existence or , . that unity the future question puts debate clarity Therefore
 . Canada , to frankness any clarity bring that into and the of debate future question or puts Government Therefore will unity the
 Canada into Government any or puts , existence and frankness unity will Therefore . the debate of question future the clarity that bring
It will create a better understanding of the true complexity and difficulty for all of us in severing ties that have developed in building a nation together. 
 of us a understanding It better in create together that . ties will developed in have for nation a all severing building the and of complexity difficulty true
 that better difficulty for complexity and in the of understanding all create us in nation have ties will building together It true a a developed of . severing
 a better nation developed true the that of ties building understanding It for create us of . have difficulty in and all severing complexity together a in will
 ties together better It will the a building nation developed all create complexity and for in severing . difficulty have true of in of that a understanding us
 have all of severing create true better in of and a nation in understanding complexity a difficulty ties It the for that . us developed building will together
 that . better true nation understanding for a developed of all in complexity difficulty create ties will a together and us building in It severing the have of
 create that better the will a building all for understanding complexity severing have . developed of in of in and nation us together true ties It difficulty a
 a will severing building create . of that true nation ties complexity of all and have for understanding together the It better developed a in in difficulty us
 and in of for all of a difficulty complexity understanding nation in the have together building It us a true that developed will better severing . create ties
 true . complexity have that nation a for better and of It developed create will the ties building understanding in in together of difficulty us a severing all
 building and a ties of all understanding complexity of difficulty the will It for developed true better nation that in us in severing have together . a create
 . together ties a It will that in in us developed severing for better and have all of a the building nation difficulty create understanding complexity of true
 of difficulty understanding complexity . nation have severing in create all building that us developed ties the It of and in true better together a will a for
 severing better all and nation ties have complexity create will in a developed true in a that understanding for It together the of . us difficulty of building
 all that It better . have nation us of create complexity for a true and building developed a difficulty in in the will understanding ties severing together of
 in difficulty all complexity severing . the have true together ties that for better a and of us understanding It in will nation of developed a create building
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
He just felt it was not necessary.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Leave is granted.  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is it your pleasure, honourable senators, to adopt the motion?  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
Motion agreed to.  
The Senate 
Conduct of Business-Notice of Inquiry 
Hon. William M. Kelly :
Honourable senators, I give notice: 
That on Thursday next, December 11, 1997, I will call the attention of the Senate to the way in which the Senate conducts its business.  
QUESTION PERIOD 
Federal-Provincial Relations 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Province of Quebec-Request for Particulars 
Hon. Fernand Roberge :
 It will create a better understanding of the true complexity and difficulty for all of us in ties that have developed in building a nation together .
 . have complexity will better all together a in and true for It the ties developed us severing a of understanding nation in building of create that
 a and difficulty together of in of create true understanding complexity ties that severing all developed a nation in better will . building the for It have
 all for better building that and difficulty of nation understanding a ties severing . complexity the in true together have create in of It a developed will
Most of all, it will demonstrate how much more we can do together than apart.  
 can Most , demonstrate than more apart of do it together will we . all how much
 do apart more . demonstrate Most it we , how can than together all of much will
 Most do together can . more of much it will all apart how than we demonstrate ,
 we of all , . more much Most it than apart can how together will demonstrate do
 , it Most can demonstrate how apart more will we . all much do of than together
 will we much more than . together it apart Most , demonstrate all how do can of
 much how all can apart more Most do , of demonstrate than we . together will it
 will Most demonstrate together can , do more . apart much all how we of than it
 together how will Most do . than it more apart we can demonstrate all much , of
 together all how demonstrate can , . much do more of apart Most will we than it
 all of it do than together how apart , much Most demonstrate . we can will more
 Most we , do demonstrate of much it more can all together apart . how will than
 we will can all apart more do together than of Most demonstrate it how . , much
 we together much more all do , than how Most can will apart of . it demonstrate
 than of we demonstrate will Most more all it , together do how much can apart .
 all we how it of than much more demonstrate will together , . can Most do apart
He has followed three policy themes to accomplish that end.  
First, he has transferred much of the tax burden to the provinces, forcing what I call "downloaded increased taxes." 
Provincial and municipal governments, who were receiving less money, had to increase taxes. 
The government transferred debt.  
Second, this government has taken advantage of the low interest rates which resulted from the efforts of the Conservative government over eight years to bring the deficit and inflation under control and to bring interest rates down.  
Third, Paul Martin then not only raised licence fees and taxes, he used the accumulated surplus in the EI fund to pay down the deficit. 
It is this third policy theme with which we, on this side, feel most uncomfortable. 
He used the surplus in the EI fund, not to extend benefits, not to reduce premiums - which is normally what is done in a payroll deduction - but to cut benefits for a totally separate policy objective. 
He used this payroll tax purely and simply, to achieve his policy goal of cutting the deficit.  
That is why the Auditor General is prohibited from examining the fund unless the directors of the fund agree. 
It should not be for the directors to agree or disagree. 
Parliament must insist that the Auditor General report to us on the fund and on its administration. 
However, the Auditor General will report to the directors of the fund on how they manage their affairs. 
That is not acceptable.  
We are talking of $100 billion by the year 2006, and rapid increases thereafter. 
On this record, it will fail.  
It is an anomaly of governments to charge taxes for employment insurance premiums, and then reduce services to accumulate a surplus to pay down a deficit. 
It then writes cheques for something else. 
The government charges taxes for transportation then imposes user fees at airports and tolls on highways for the right to use the airports and highways that we have paid taxes to build and maintain. 
It imposes taxes to create historical sites and national parks and then charge people to get in. 
 of all , it will demonstrate how much more we can do together than apart .
 we do of . more together much how than apart can demonstrate all , it will
 demonstrate will together can more of we Most apart all , than much do it how
 of , . more we than all much Most can apart do together it demonstrate will
The Government will work closely with provincial and territorial governments to further advance the progress made by nine Premiers and the territorial leaders last week in Calgary toward the full recognition of the diversity inherent in the federation, including the unique character of Quebec society.  
 the governments to . federation inherent advance in recognition by progress closely Calgary work Premiers nine character and provincial society of further the , in the the of will including last the week The full territorial diversity leaders made with the Government and toward Quebec territorial unique
 of made inherent in closely nine the further progress and Quebec . and character diversity The the the with will the the advance leaders provincial territorial work territorial full society federation week governments the toward by last , including Calgary of Government in unique to Premiers recognition
 work federation to the the the , character Premiers with week the including territorial toward last provincial nine the Government of unique society in and made The inherent in will progress and advance territorial full . by recognition Calgary governments closely Quebec diversity the further of leaders
 progress to in further inherent of leaders including last with governments and territorial diversity and federation by full of The work recognition closely Government society . the will territorial Calgary , the character the made the provincial advance the the week Premiers nine in toward unique Quebec
 in federation with and leaders governments the made territorial the toward character of society the progress the the Quebec of recognition . in last Premiers Calgary week , the work provincial will including advance by full diversity inherent to closely territorial unique further Government nine The and
 Calgary with . Premiers the and Quebec will society the unique recognition the of and advance week the federation including progress leaders the in , further full in provincial inherent Government nine territorial last work character toward The of made to the closely territorial governments by diversity
 further to progress unique territorial made of Premiers in the federation leaders nine the last including work governments Government the by territorial society inherent full week . in character , of toward The with and provincial recognition the will advance the the Quebec diversity and Calgary closely
 progress the made toward the Calgary of advance in including the the further The of leaders full closely territorial Premiers unique with nine and Government inherent to provincial federation territorial last work Quebec the week will governments , diversity character society and the in by . recognition
 in work with the character will unique progress Government territorial governments territorial Premiers and nine provincial Quebec the the made week the The . advance recognition of and leaders by the diversity inherent federation full last further the closely in to Calgary of , toward including society
 progress to work by territorial the inherent toward with Premiers Quebec diversity of advance unique of , . the the in federation Government recognition and nine the territorial character the governments made Calgary leaders full will The closely provincial including the society last in week further and
 diversity territorial including full , territorial the Calgary Government further leaders governments . made last and work The provincial the and of closely inherent federation of nine by in with Premiers week to society unique Quebec in the advance progress recognition character the will the the toward
 progress Quebec provincial federation society the Calgary including of the will the the Premiers character full made nine and in toward work diversity the . territorial last and inherent , advance week territorial the by The governments recognition to with in further of Government unique closely leaders
 in in the leaders the provincial the Quebec governments made society closely of will The the further the , by diversity Calgary the recognition of inherent territorial last federation and Government progress character week territorial . and with Premiers toward unique work to including advance full nine
 nine recognition the the the . provincial last progress of in by and the work the and toward governments territorial will further society to Calgary advance federation unique The in including with made inherent character Quebec Government of , territorial closely the Premiers leaders week full diversity
 diversity advance the The to in unique with Calgary character week Premiers Quebec the toward work progress federation in the the and leaders governments last recognition of the full and provincial territorial closely by . territorial further of including the society will Government , inherent nine made
 with governments last society , in of work the will provincial progress nine the full of leaders inherent . Government Premiers week the the and territorial in diversity by and the territorial including Calgary further closely advance to federation character recognition toward Quebec unique the made The
In fact, cash payments paid to Quebec for health and education will be reduced by over $300 million over a five-year period. 
Honourable senators, I remind you that these cuts are in addition to this year's reduction of $700 million compared to last year. 
Could the minister make inquiries and inform the Senate of the reasons why, in spite of a cash floor set at $12.5 billion, Quebec's share will diminish by $307 million over the next five years?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
The federal government cut its own spending earlier, more drastically and in greater measure than transfers to the provinces. 
The government has made it clear that it will use increased fiscal flexibility to make strategic investments in priority areas, and action was taken early and directly on that commitment based on favourable fiscal results that emerged this past spring.  
With respect to individual provinces, I do not have those numbers. 
However, I would be happy to provide them for my honourable friend.  
Senator Roberge :
Could the minister find out at the same time why, in the same time period, Ontario's share of the cash transfers will increase to $173 million?  
Senator Graham :
Yes. 
While I am doing that, I should like to remind the honourable senator that even before the federal government balances the books, it is putting more money into transfers to the provinces. 
In fact, the government is raising the cash floor from $11 billion to $12.5 billion, the single largest reinvestment made by the federal government. 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Provinces-Effect on Atlantic Provinces 
Hon. Mabel M. DeWare :
Honourable senators, my figures show that, four years ago, the provinces received more than $19 billion in cash transfers for health, education and welfare through what was then known as the Canadian Assistance Program and Established Programs Financing. 
The government's math provides some good news, as the original plan was to give them even less.  
The problem is that some provinces will get less under the new scheme while others will get more. 
Indeed, seven of the ten provinces will actually see their cash transfers fall even further, including all of Atlantic Canada.  
 The Government will work closely with provincial and territorial to further advance the progress made by nine Premiers and the territorial leaders last week in Calgary toward the full recognition of the diversity inherent in the federation , including the unique character of Quebec society .
 further week The and to , Government the including recognition with of diversity unique work territorial leaders last the progress advance Calgary full in toward made and nine the character the territorial by in of society will closely the federation provincial . governments Premiers the Quebec
 full Quebec made work Calgary to the toward Government the recognition inherent territorial diversity and nine governments federation territorial of in unique the , character further will . The in week including the with progress by society and provincial advance the leaders Premiers the closely of
 of in character recognition closely Quebec nine the toward Calgary . diversity week federation The by with provincial leaders made work the the advance territorial and , Government Premiers governments inherent society will unique to the including and the further in territorial the full of progress
We will build on the mutual respect Canadians have for one another to achieve our common aspirations for a better future.  
 mutual another . respect aspirations better Canadians our future a for one build will common on the achieve have to We for
 better another for have mutual achieve build the will on a aspirations one our future for common . respect to Canadians We
 . respect Canadians a one We common the our build have for mutual on another better for will achieve aspirations to future
 respect a mutual will on have future build our another Canadians achieve to one for for better We common aspirations the .
 a the achieve . have mutual to another better one will future our build for common respect for We Canadians on aspirations
 for one common achieve Canadians on future have to We mutual respect the . better another will aspirations our for a build
 have future for . common build respect to the aspirations a better one Canadians our another on achieve We will for mutual
 will respect achieve future one the better We for common for our to have . aspirations mutual on build a another Canadians
 better common to the for on one another future build for a We respect mutual will . Canadians aspirations achieve our have
 a mutual aspirations respect build the better will We to . common our have future Canadians for one on achieve another for
 one . Canadians better build common to on for We mutual another achieve our have respect future a will aspirations for the
 on another Canadians to will achieve better build We the aspirations common our for one mutual for have a future . respect
 have on build future achieve to for better one the for We respect Canadians mutual a . another our will common aspirations
 better have achieve future one common for We a aspirations the our . another to on will respect for build Canadians mutual
 common for the another have our will achieve on build a respect to We for . one future mutual better aspirations Canadians
 build common one to our achieve respect will better . Canadians on aspirations the for have another for a future We mutual
Hon. Noël A. Kinsella (Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition) :
Honourable senators, in the past two years or so, there has been a common understanding in this chamber that Wednesdays would constitute a short day. 
This is why we have been meeting at 1:30 p.m. The general understanding is that we try to finish our business in the chamber by about 3:30 p.m. 
In the past few weeks, we have heard requests like the one raised by the Honourable Senator Stewart. 
If the request speaks to a Tuesday or a Thursday, when we normally meet at 2 p.m. and sit a little longer, there would be no difficulty, all things being equal, in granting leave. 
However, I am having some difficulty in granting leave for a day when we are supposed to be having a short day in any event.  
I would ask the honourable Chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee if he would explain his motion in light of the fact that Wednesday is a short day.  
Senator Stewart :
Honourable senators, there are two points:
First, we are hoping tomorrow to have a timely assessment of the achievements of the APEC meetings.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Watch out for the pepper spray!  
Senator Stewart :
The second point relates to the request for permission to meet tomorrow at 3:15 p.m. although the Senate may be then sitting. 
If I felt secure in the prognosis that the Senate would rise at three o'clock - which is the assumption on which we base our start time of 1:30 p.m. - I certainly would not undertake to put forward this motion. 
However, past experience suggests that, notwithstanding the fact that we do meet on Wednesdays at 1:30 p.m., we often sit well beyond three o'clock. 
On one occasion we had witnesses waiting for upwards of an hour.  
Senator Kinsella :
Thank you, Senator Stewart.  
Perhaps I might address the Deputy Leader of the Government, then. 
 We will build on the mutual respect Canadians have for one another to achieve our common for a better future .
 mutual on another to aspirations respect a one for build will have We . achieve common our for better Canadians the
 for mutual achieve on respect another have one a We for better the aspirations our common future . build to Canadians
 a on respect for achieve our another better will aspirations Canadians common for to future . one mutual We the build
Investing in Children 
 Children Investing in
 Children Investing in
 Investing Children in
 in Children Investing
 Investing in Children
 in Investing Children
 Children Investing in
 in Investing Children
 Investing Children in
 Children Investing in
 in Investing Children
 Children Investing in
 in Children Investing
 in Children Investing
 Investing Children in
 in Investing Children
Senator Forrestall :
Cabinet will meet again, then. 
I am pleased to hear that.  
Search and Rescue Helicopter Replacement Program-State of Sea King Helicopter Fleet-Government Position 
Hon. J. Michael Forrestall :
Where are the other six? 
Are they on ships at sea? 
We have 30 in the inventory.  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, the answer is yes, there are 30 helicopters in the inventory. 
As I indicated yesterday, 24 were cleared, and six remain to be inspected. 
They will be inspected by December 18.  
Of the 24 that were inspected, only two were found to be in need of repair. 
As to precisely where the other six are located, I would need to consult with the appropriate authorities at National Defence. 
I will bring forward an answer for my honourable friend.  
Senator Forrestall :
Was there any criticism from our NATO allies with respect to the grounding of these aircraft? 
My understanding is that these aircraft are at sea, and a number of them are engaged in some training exercises. 
Were we criticized for not being able to live up to our obligations?  
Senator Graham :
 Investing Children
 Investing Children
 Investing in
 Children in
A country that has decided to invest in its children is a country that is confident in its future. 
 country future its a is invest to is in children country decided its confident that has . in A that
 A country to is its that in future in children a has country . confident decided invest that its is
 is children in a is A confident future its country its that that . country in decided to has invest
 a country future has in confident . A that invest its to country that its in is is decided children
 is in in A to that has country confident invest decided that its country its is children a . future
 is confident invest . children future A decided that has that country its in a in is its country to
 its its has in that . in to country confident children future country decided that invest is A a is
 that its invest has in future children is country its that country a is . to decided in A confident
 is to a that in is country confident decided children in future . that has its A invest country its
 future in that that is a its country confident children has is to country decided in invest A . its
 country . is its decided in that children its is future a in invest A country to confident has that
 confident that in country a has in that to is A invest future its its country is children decided .
 decided country to A that its a future has is country . is its in confident children that invest in
 children to country is is invest its future in in country A that its has . decided a confident that
 . has country decided a to is confident its its is future children that in that invest A country in
 its in decided to that country A is is a country its invest that confident has . future children in
Why are my figures different from those of my honourable friend?  
Senator Grafstein :
Again, honourable senators, this is a question of evidence. 
I refer all senators to the transcript.  
I wish to speak specifically about the fact that we are dealing with elites as opposed to the groups they represent. 
We questioned these representatives during the hearings as to whether their underlying groups agreed with the position they had taken.  
On the Catholic side, we had the position of the archbishops, as limited as it was. 
We had Catholic school boards and Catholic teachers. 
I remember specifically cross-examining Catholic teachers and asking whether they had discussions with students and their parents respecting the changes. 
Their view was that they represented the broad consensus of parents and students as it applied to this amendment. 
All parents wanted a change to renovate the school system, and this was the best modality in which to do that.  
I agree with Senator Lynch-Staunton, Senator Wood and Senator Lavoie-Roux that this is not perfect. 
However, in addition to the evidence, we did refer to opinion polls that seemed to suggest a strong support for reform along these lines.  
Yes, the resolution is imperfect. 
We would like to have done it "our way," as Frank Sinatra used to say, but we must deal with the Province of Quebec in this case. 
We had to bend imperfect tools to see whether they fit our minimum requirements. 
In my view, they did not fit our minimum requirements; they fit our reasonable requirements for constitutional amendment.  
Senator Wood :
Is it not true in the letter from the bishops of Quebec - the letter the honourable senator read - that they were in favour of repealing section 93? 
They questioned linguistic rights and suggested that denominational guarantees established by 107 be maintained. 
 A country that has decided to invest in its children is a country that is confident in future .
 confident future a invest A in decided that is has country in country children . its that is to
 future is country decided country . that a A its has to in is that in invest its children
 to in has A children future invest in is that that . country its confident decided its country is
A country that invests in its children successfully will have a better future. 
 better invests that a its future A successfully country . in have children will
 its a . in better children will future country successfully invests that have A
 will have country A invests in better future . a children successfully its that
 country will children invests A have a successfully future in its better that .
 better future invests that country A have successfully children its in . a will
 A in a have children invests will . better successfully country that future its
 country will have better its children . A that invests successfully future in a
 that future country will children a successfully have its A invests . in better
 invests in successfully . children that have will country a A future better its
 have invests A its better will successfully . in country a children that future
 children a . successfully its in better have will A country invests future that
 A country children . future invests in have that a successfully will better its
 better in country a its A future . that successfully children invests will have
 have successfully its better that country a in will invests A future children .
 in children . A future successfully that better have country will invests its a
 in children have successfully invests . that A a better country future will its
They want to erase religious instruction from the school system, which is imposed on them. 
Narrow as it may be, unfair as it may be, and discriminatory as it may be, it was still renewed in 1982 and given protection from the Charter only 15 years ago. 
That is the reason. 
Do we want to be party to that?  
Do not mix up the reform of the system with the taking away of constitutional, legal rights of two identifiable religious faiths. 
That is what we are being asked to do.  
My personal opinion is that religion should not be in the schools, but that is probably old-fashioned now. 
I do not know. 
However, I will not argue that point.  
I am saying to myself that here in this Parliament we are being asked to remove legal rights. 
I hope that Senator Grafstein will at least agree that the minister should come before us in Committee of the Whole when we come to the resolution, and be prepared to answer some of these questions.  
Will you agree with me that we invite the minister to attend and debate that and other questions?  
Senator Grafstein :
Honourable senators, I am trying to follow practice and procedure in the Senate. 
I am addressing the report of the special joint committee. 
For me, the question is elucidation for honourable senators to consider that report. 
To me, the evidence and the outcome are clear. 
There may be evidence in other places, and there may be views held by other people, but I had the evidence before the committee. 
I would not say it was totally unequivocal, but it was clear enough to satisfy me that there was a high enough hurdle having been passed to support the federal resolution. 
That is what I have said in my speech. 
 A country that invests in its children successfully will have a better .
 . have that future in invests better successfully country will a children A
 better future country . its that A a will have in invests successfully
 country will in its children invests successfully better a future have that .
One of our objectives as a country should be to ensure that all Canadian children have the best possible opportunity to develop their full potential. 
 have of . our opportunity ensure should that potential possible all develop to be best Canadian country as to the objectives a full children their One
 best that children all One . opportunity should Canadian possible their be the of ensure country develop objectives a to potential full our have as to
 objectives potential opportunity that One possible have develop our as their all country children of should a to to full Canadian the ensure be best .
 that potential opportunity our . possible the as ensure One develop Canadian country to objectives have their a to all best of be children full should
 full country best opportunity potential all ensure that have as our of children develop should possible a . be to the to their One objectives Canadian
 their Canadian possible opportunity be . that to objectives of full have ensure all as to best a our should country One the develop children potential
 that country full Canadian potential possible be best ensure to . should One develop as the have opportunity their our of a children to objectives all
 should our be a full potential possible as country their have . Canadian ensure objectives to that all develop One children of opportunity the best to
 a country to Canadian should as ensure be potential that full develop their best . to possible One objectives have our of all opportunity the children
 to of children be potential develop to have our opportunity objectives best Canadian full country all . ensure their should One the as possible a that
 develop ensure . their potential to opportunity as objectives that Canadian the possible best be should country full our have to of One a children all
 . full their as ensure to potential have One a of be opportunity children Canadian possible develop best that should to the all objectives country our
 as opportunity to objectives best have Canadian be ensure . a full potential our develop of the One to possible country all that should their children
 be Canadian the that objectives ensure develop country their should children possible One full our of opportunity best to have to . all potential a as
 ensure children develop have a as opportunity possible full of objectives best Canadian . that to all to our be potential the One should country their
 potential should all Canadian objectives have best the develop a ensure possible of country opportunity . children as to our full their be to One that
Have different people manage different funds so that we will have some evaluation, some comparison and some diversification.  
Hon. Michael A. Meighen :
Honourable senators, this is precisely where I wanted clarification. 
Are you recommending that the fund be divided into four $25-billion portions and that so many firms administer each $25-billion portion in its entirety? 
Or are you recommending that one firm be responsible for one sector, such as the real estate sector and another firm be responsible for another sector?  
Senator Bolduc :
Honourable senators, in my opinion, it could be by sector, but my preference would be for the total to be broken down into four portions covering a variety of investments. 
Otherwise, if you have a block of $25 or $30 billion in real estate, you know what that means. 
Senator Meighen :
You mentioned decentralizing the decision-making process, did you not? 
Do you see any advantage to having decision-making centres such as the firm handling the $25-billion segment being located in different parts of the country?  
Senator Bolduc :
In Quebec, when the problem came up in connection with the pension plan in 1966, we insisted on having our own plan. 
I am not saying that this is how it should be across Canada; that is not my point. 
What I am saying is that, in Quebec, at the time, Jean Lesage had made it very clear that the fund was designed to provide social security. 
That is why we fought so hard for the Caisse de dépôt et placement at the time: to have this flexibility.  
I am not saying this practice should be generalized and extended to Ontario or any other province; it may cause problems I had not thought of so far. 
There is no doubt that it could be more difficult for some provinces. 
I do not exclude however the idea that provincial politicians could bring pressure to bear on this organization so that, when investments are made, people from each region benefit. 
To what extent will ethics and conflict of interest rules be overlooked? 
 One of our objectives as a country should be to that all Canadian children have the best possible opportunity to develop their full potential .
 best Canadian to have our their as children develop the of should potential full all that opportunity One a . country be objectives possible to
 develop their should opportunity objectives our ensure . the be country all of have potential a children Canadian to as to that best possible One
 have should our . all as of opportunity to objectives One full a develop best potential their be possible country ensure the Canadian that children
We must equip our children with the capacities they need to be ready to learn and to participate fully in our society.  
 ready capacities . equip be to We participate with they the society learn our to in to and our need children fully must
 need ready our to . participate society fully must and our We to capacities equip in to they with children the learn be
 learn participate in . children fully equip and capacities ready must need our our be We to to society to with they the
 . the must and children learn with ready We fully capacities to participate our be in equip our they to to need society
 be . with need to equip ready in our our to participate they fully to and learn We must the children society capacities
 capacities be they and learn to fully our with We ready to equip the our . to need society in must participate children
 and to need fully children ready the learn with our in equip . participate our be must to to they capacities society We
 need We equip ready our to be and to fully our children the . capacities they learn society participate with to must in
 to be in society the our We ready and learn to they must children to equip our fully capacities participate with . need
 and need must be society to our ready they learn . the equip We with fully our to participate to in capacities children
 in be We children equip to society our learn our to participate the must fully and with ready capacities to need they .
 equip to the with to be fully participate must our in We . need our to capacities children and society learn they ready
 capacities to children society with participate to they . equip need our ready fully in must We our to be and learn the
 children they our equip to to fully must and We be our need with . to ready the participate learn society capacities in
 must learn with be to capacities they participate the children and in society ready our . equip need our We to fully to
 to they need fully to our . and children in be capacities participate ready society the We our must with equip to learn
I believe that education, in pith and substance, is a provincial matter.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
That is not the question.  
Senator Grafstein :
That is what the Constitution says.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
I do not disagree.  
Senator Grafstein :
That is what section 93 says.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
No, section 93 does not say that.  
Senator Grafstein :
The Province of Quebec, by its lawfully elected assembly, has requested a resolution amending the Constitution. 
How can I ask them to respect the Constitution if I do not respect the Constitution? 
I respect the Constitution.  
Honourable senators, this is a lawful request done in a lawful way. 
Perhaps certain words are egregious, but it is done in a lawful way, and I am prepared to support them. 
To my mind, the fact that they are prepared to proceed with their reforms before we legislate in any way, shape or form is their business; it is not my business. 
My business is to uphold the Constitution when they request we uphold processes under the Constitution.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
 We must equip our children with the capacities they need to be ready to learn and participate fully in our society .
 . in children with We our must need and our learn capacities fully the be participate to society equip to to they
 participate our to the and society equip . to to in they learn We be with must capacities our children fully ready
 to equip be and . society must our the capacities We children fully to need with to they ready learn our participate
While families have the greatest responsibility in the nurturing and development of our children, they are not alone. 
 development the While . families , of not alone children are they nurturing and have responsibility the our in greatest
 and children of have our responsibility development are not . the the in families While alone greatest , they nurturing
 the . the responsibility have not , While families greatest our they development alone nurturing are of in children and
 greatest alone children of have in and are our nurturing development . they responsibility families While not , the the
 not are of nurturing children the in have . they , development greatest families responsibility alone our the and While
 have . they nurturing responsibility the families alone , in While children greatest development not are the our and of
 greatest have in , alone While children our . are the not nurturing they of the responsibility and development families
 , in have . children While nurturing families development and our the responsibility they of the not greatest are alone
 greatest have they . , While the and in of nurturing are development alone the children responsibility our not families
 have they , responsibility are development . nurturing our families and not in the children While greatest alone the of
 families the . , not greatest our development are While the nurturing and they in of have responsibility children alone
 . have While in and children responsibility nurturing families they the greatest the are not , of our alone development
 in and While the . the not families children development responsibility of greatest are have they alone our nurturing ,
 our are of development . children responsibility they not greatest , While the families nurturing have alone and the in
 children development , the have greatest . While our they nurturing responsibility the alone not and in families of are
 and they have , our children nurturing development in the responsibility are While . of the greatest families alone not
To that inquiry, Senator Graham replied, "Yes." 
He also said that this was a matter to which I had referred before, and that there are 1-800 lines available. 
He said that that was the communication plan on the part of the government.  
The crux of this whole taxation matter came about on November 26, when I asked the following question of the Leader of the Government in the Senate: 
On October 1 of this year, Senator Meighen asked a question concerning employment insurance. 
On October 23, I asked a further question, referring to my colleague's earlier question. 
I received a response yesterday to my question, and I wish to read it into the record. 
This concerns employment insurance and the reserve. 
It states: 
A reserve is necessary, since it makes it possible to apply more stable premium rates throughout the economic cycle, thus making it possible to avoid increasing them in a recessionary period. 
In addition, the reserve makes it possible to ensure there are sufficient funds to pay benefits when they are most necessary.  
What happened in the last recession was a $2 billion surplus in the Employment Insurance Account turned into a $6 billion deficit in two years, and it was necessary to increase premiums by 30% at what was already a difficult time for job creation. 
Consequently, the government believes that it is wise to establish a reserve in the Employment Insurance Account.  
I am assuming that since you have given me this response, that was indeed the strategy on the part of the government.  
I then went on to say: 
If I may, I will quote from The Financial Post of today, November 26, a 1997. 
An editorial entitled "EI surplus is a deficit-reduction tax" states clearly that the EI will result: 
...in an accumulated surplus suspected to top a scandalous $19 billion by the end of 1998. 
If you need $8 billion to look after a recession, using the last recession as the example, what kind of recession are you planning on?  
That is to say, what kind of recession are they planning on in the future with a reserve of $18 billion?  
 While families have the greatest responsibility in the nurturing development of our children , they are not alone .
 are of alone the nurturing they responsibility development have greatest and While our , families the children in .
 families not greatest While alone and they , nurturing the the development children of responsibility in our . are
 greatest our development not , alone they in the responsibility nurturing families . are children While have the and
It requires focussing on what children need to thrive.  
 children thrive need requires to . focussing on what It
 . need thrive what requires focussing It on children to
 It requires . what need focussing on children thrive to
 thrive what focussing need It to children . requires on
 need what . on requires children focussing It thrive to
 thrive requires . focussing need what children It on to
 need on It thrive to children what requires focussing .
 focussing on need requires thrive It children what to .
 what focussing children to It . requires thrive need on
 requires It children to thrive focussing . what need on
 It requires focussing children thrive . to need on what
 children . requires to It what focussing on thrive need
 It children need . what on to thrive requires focussing
 to focussing children thrive . need It what requires on
 children It on what requires focussing need to . thrive
 need children focussing . It to thrive requires what on
I wanted to suggest that perhaps criminals should apply for a warrant before they commit murder, but I do not want to pursue that because I am afraid that some Charter judge will give them a warrant or a licence to do so. 
Fifteen years ago, I would have been shocked at criticism of a decision rendered by the Supreme Court; but, today that is commonplace. 
When a major decision comes down from the Supreme Court, the media is there to interview people who wish to comment, mostly negatively, on the decision. 
As I stated, we would not have seen a headline like that 15 years ago.  
That is their function, and Parliament has referred it to them. 
However, the enactment of laws remains the function of Parliament. 
It is not the function of the Supreme Court of Canada or any other court to make laws.  
Honourable senators, I read in today's paper where the families of the Leslie Mahaffy and Kristen French, both of whom were killed by Paul Bernardo, are appealing to the judge to make a law prohibiting evidence of that type being heard by the public in court. 
The interesting point is that they are asking the judge to make the law; they are not asking Parliament. 
Parliament is the highest court in the land and that must always be so. 
It would be most unusual to have a lower court issue a directive to a higher court.  
Honourable senators, I commend Senator Cools for all the work and research she has done. 
Many aspects of her amendment are worthwhile considering. 
However, I feel she has omitted to take into consideration one aspect of our legislation.  
Any law passed by Parliament does not become law until it receives Royal Assent, and having the Supreme Court direct Parliament to pass a law by December 19, 1997 takes away the prerogative of the sovereign. 
That is why we have Royal Assent. 
We could have the ridiculous situation of one of the judges who ordered the enactment of this legislation by December 19 coming into this chamber and giving Royal Assent on behalf of the sovereign.  
Motion in Sub-Amendment 
Hon. Orville H. Phillips :
Therefore, I move: 
 It requires focussing on what need to thrive .
 what children need . to on focussing It requires
 what on . thrive children requires need focussing It
 to It . children on need what focussing thrive
The experiences of Canada's children, especially in the early years, influence their health, their well-being, and their ability to learn and adapt throughout their entire lives. 
 years especially learn influence ability ' , being well to - their lives and entire experiences adapt of health . in Canada The their and , throughout their , , the their children early s
 health , their Canada . especially s ability adapt their early and experiences learn well , throughout , The in lives influence the to their , their entire and of ' years being - children
 of , especially being entire lives , The adapt ' the well - . learn early their health years their in to Canada s experiences their and their influence and , children throughout , ability
 their learn adapt and in their s Canada , lives ' to well experiences children . ability and The entire especially years health the early , their influence - , throughout their , being of
 well their learn years throughout the especially , their ability s their early children , and of Canada . their , being ' - , entire and lives in adapt experiences The to health influence
 learn s experiences , and ' entire . years , well early their influence The Canada of the adapt and children - their being health especially ability lives , , to their throughout in their
 their and ' s the experiences health especially their of and . to well years early lives , ability - children , adapt in their , Canada influence The entire their being throughout , learn
 and lives , - being entire their adapt of especially The ' experiences their in health , years the Canada . learn throughout s , , early ability well their their and influence children to
 their being The the years and - learn ' of especially health experiences their , lives their early and s , in children well their . , throughout adapt to Canada , influence entire ability
 children lives , ' , . health and entire the The being in s ability especially their their learn to experiences influence well , their throughout adapt their Canada and early , - of years
 well their the Canada , experiences especially , being influence ability adapt throughout in and their , to . and years lives health ' entire their of s The their learn children early , -
 lives years early ' being learn their and their entire to well children - and adapt ability of throughout Canada experiences health The especially , . in their influence , , their , the s
 their entire and . especially early , health Canada of well children , s ' their adapt throughout their , lives experiences years ability - The the to being in learn their and influence ,
 learn their adapt years , to , Canada , of early ' s experiences especially ability children their and in - health their and their The entire , throughout being the well lives . influence
 learn , their lives being s , of throughout , the entire in well experiences years their adapt and - . early ability children , health influence their and Canada especially to ' The their
 , health early and their throughout experiences being learn to lives , their especially in - , adapt ability . their years their entire Canada influence , of The well and children ' s the
A moment ago I said that when a government agency, a public office, is created, there is a risk of politicizing the process.  
Participation in business, with such enormous amounts, cannot be limited to a few major companies - the Canadian market is not all that big - but will also extend to a multitude of medium-sized businesses. 
The available funding will be sufficient to invest in hundreds of medium-sized businesses. 
In Quebec, for example, if I remember correctly from its last report, the Caisse de dépôt already invests in almost 800 Quebec businesses.  
Now, how are these 800 to be selected and monitored? 
There is likely to be arbitrariness and patronage.  
In addition, the Board will be everywhere and inevitably set conditions. 
Businesses will have to toe the line as the provinces do when Ottawa doles out conditional funding, as you may recall. 
This concentration of power, this centralization will be unhealthy. 
This technocracy and its perverse effects make me nervous. 
I hope one day we will have nothing worse than Mr. Sorros' manoeuvres to criticize.  
The regulations governing investments and the behaviour of administrators have not been revealed. 
They are not ready. 
What guidelines will there be for administrators? 
A parliamentary review is therefore vital before their implementation.  
In concluding, I would say to the government that the preferable alternative to its bill would be to simply oblige everyone in the labour force in Canada to invest a percentage of their savings in funds under private management or let government assume its role by providing a safety net for those who could not set aside enough money for their old age.  
Here is an intelligent response to the challenge before us. 
However, and it is regrettable in this era of the welfare state, it seems to me that we prefer to make sweeping rules that apply to everyone in order to resolve the problem of a few.  
Hon. Philippe Deane Gigantès :
You talk with admiration of private investment management. 
 The experiences of Canada ' s children , in the early years , influence their health , their well - being , and their ability to learn and adapt throughout their entire lives .
 and children being ability ' to , . experiences , years their health learn lives - and their their throughout , in early influence The well s entire , the especially of Canada adapt
 Canada of . learn well , especially being s their and entire lives , ability adapt their the children - influence their experiences The years ' health in early , , to and throughout
 The ability and well to , their children early their adapt s the especially Canada , lives years , , influence entire ' experiences learn . health being of and their - in throughout
By investing now in the well-being of today's children, we improve the long-term health of our society. 
 health being we society long By well today now ' - in children the s of . investing our improve , term of - the
 today the By . term investing our s now - , being children society long we the improve in - ' of well health of
 investing , term s - our - of of well ' in now health long the improve today By the we society children . being
 of we - s in children term of being our the society now well long improve investing ' today , - . the By health
 the - of our the By well in improve investing now long s term society of children . - , being health today ' we
 ' the health today - By in s of being our - society term the investing well , now we improve children . long of
 today society long of - improve investing children . in s being our now the ' - , the By of term we health well
 investing of . improve , today of in the By s society our - children - ' the term well now we being long health
 long ' being in the well we children the - s term improve of our investing - of society . , today By health now
 our in investing society health ' being the of By term today we . the well long - - now , children of s improve
 our , of society the . the term children - now today improve long in health - s being By well we ' investing of
 now the children being - By we of term s long today investing our . improve - , society health ' in of well the
 well long of society the s health improve - our today we children - term . ' in , being By investing now of the
 today of now the s By of investing . the we our society - , term in being long ' health improve well children -
 the , improve well term ' being our investing we in of now health long By . - children - s of today society the
 , term . of today - children s in we our investing long well improve the By being society now of ' the - health
Senator Oliver continued: 
We were told that the net tax grab from this and other measures that restrict tax assistance for retirement savings, notably yet another freeze in RRSP contributions, would total about $40 million this year and $175 million next year. 
We were not told how much of that came from lowering the age for RRSP conversions.  
When that many Canadians are unaware of what is happening, we have a severe problem.  
On November 20, I said: 
Honourable senators, I wish to address my question to the Leader of the Government in the Senate. 
It dates back to October 1, 1997, to a question asked at that time by Senator Meighen, which is only 51 days ago.  
I will quote Senator Meighen, who said: 
It has been 51 days!  
On November 25, I said the following: 
In a paper released the week prior to November 25, the Association of Canadian Pension Management said that the Seniors Benefit will stifle savings. 
To quote from their paper: 
Middle-income Canadians might simply decide to supplement government programs through the accumulation of non-income producing capital, such as homes or interest-free mortgages for their children. 
They may simply avoid retirement savings plans that generate heavily taxed income...  
They go on to suggest that Ottawa structure the Seniors Benefit in such a way that it will not result in an effective tax rate in excess of 50 per cent.  
Was the government listening when I asked that question? 
Senator Graham said, "Of course, yes." 
Did the Leader of the Government in the Senate read The Financial Post editorial that morning in which it was recommended that this problem be changed to reflect such an issue? 
From what I understand, in the other place all amendments have been struck down and no further amendments are coming forward. 
As we know, no amendments were passed.  
 By investing now in the well - being of ' s children , we improve the long - term health of our society .
 ' now , . term we By - health long the investing society improve children of today - our being well in s the
 well health today term in we ' By of being , the of improve our - children - s investing . now long the
 being , the health ' of improve society well By investing children today our term - in the we now . of s -
Addressing the needs of low-income families with children is therefore a priority of the Government.  
 . families of Addressing - of the low a with therefore priority income the children is Government needs
 - low income the therefore needs the with of a . priority is Addressing children Government families of
 a Addressing of . Government priority children low with of families - needs income therefore the the is
 needs low Addressing of a children of families with the priority income the . - Government is therefore
 the of the children is income . of with Addressing Government therefore a needs low families - priority
 income needs is low . a families - the children of the Addressing priority of Government with therefore
 children a . income Addressing priority therefore families needs - with of of low Government is the the
 a low therefore priority is of children needs the Government income with - of the families . Addressing
 therefore income the with children is the priority . Addressing needs - a of families Government of low
 income of . children the families needs Government with a therefore of priority is low Addressing the -
 children . therefore low families needs the with income priority - of is Addressing of the Government a
 families - of the priority Government with needs children income low . Addressing the of is therefore a
 Government children is the of of income - priority with Addressing low . a the therefore needs families
 Government children therefore a income is . with needs the families of - of the Addressing priority low
 families children the . of of priority therefore with Government the Addressing income is low - needs a
 needs income . is the of families children of priority low with - Government a the therefore Addressing
Now we have forgotten Mondays, but we have continued on with the practice of having early sittings on Wednesdays. 
As a result, Wednesday has become a normal working session, going on until five or six o'clock. 
The whole purpose of starting the session at 1:30 p.m. has been defeated.  
I do not think it is correct, unless there is an urgency, for committees to sit at the same time as the chamber. 
This is not for appearances' sake, but because the work done here can often be as important in the debates as what goes on in committees. 
At various stages of our work - the introduction of bills, second reading, committee referral, then third reading - we are often doing several at the same time. 
Sometimes even two, three or four committees are sitting when we are sitting. 
That is an improper practice.  
If the deputy leader could guarantee to us that, on Wednesdays from now on - and we will strive to be cooperative - we will sit no later than 3:30 p.m., unless there is a proven urgency, then I think Senator Stewart's motion is in order. 
However, we need that assurance first.  
Senator Carstairs :
Let me assure the Leader and Deputy Leader of the Opposition that we will do everything on our part to ensure that sessions end on time. 
We did sit yesterday, which was a Monday. 
I can assure senators we will be sitting next Monday in order to fulfil the business of the chamber before the Christmas break.  
Senator Kinsella :
On that basis, I do not think leave is necessary.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is leave granted?  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
He just felt it was not necessary.  
 the needs of low - income families with children is therefore a priority of the Government .
 families children with income is . needs low a priority - of of the Addressing therefore the
 of income the - of a therefore families low children priority is Government . with needs Addressing
 children income is the low Government needs of Addressing families with - a the . priority of
Federal, provincial and territorial governments have agreed to address in a cooperative way the problems of low-income families with children. 
 territorial governments income the of address agreed , problems way low in - with children families have a cooperative and Federal provincial to .
 . problems low cooperative the way governments a and children , provincial - territorial address income in with of have to families Federal agreed
 a problems in to Federal governments families territorial agreed - low have income the , provincial . of cooperative way and with address children
 agreed governments territorial a problems families of cooperative - Federal , . children have in with income and low the address to way provincial
 families governments , provincial address cooperative way in and to of low with problems - agreed have territorial children the a Federal income .
 children way , families provincial the in . governments - and to territorial problems a income cooperative of with low address Federal have agreed
 low income , way governments families agreed in the - Federal problems with provincial of a have and territorial address to . children cooperative
 families provincial . to way territorial cooperative agreed problems and a address income have of low children governments , the in with - Federal
 have children low and income Federal families a with to agreed problems the in . governments - , territorial cooperative provincial way of address
 to - income way low of territorial . families agreed and have problems cooperative the address Federal in , governments a with provincial children
 income have problems - governments territorial . and a provincial with , Federal to children in address of the agreed cooperative families low way
 children in , to address low . the agreed Federal problems territorial of - cooperative way a have provincial income and with governments families
 families agreed children problems - with Federal governments income cooperative a low . territorial and provincial to have address , of way the in
 in - of address provincial . problems governments children agreed with to families the and income Federal have territorial cooperative low a , way
 address cooperative with the , income provincial . problems agreed in governments families and - Federal a of children have low way territorial to
 Federal low way the provincial have children with agreed . governments address - problems in , cooperative to and territorial a income families of
If I may, I will quote from The Financial Post of today, November 26, a 1997. 
An editorial entitled "EI surplus is a deficit-reduction tax" states clearly that the EI will result: 
...in an accumulated surplus suspected to top a scandalous $19 billion by the end of 1998. 
If you need $8 billion to look after a recession, using the last recession as the example, what kind of recession are you planning on?  
That is to say, what kind of recession are they planning on in the future with a reserve of $18 billion?  
Provincial finance ministers met in Ottawa. 
I think last night they had dinner with Finance Minister Paul Martin. 
In an article in The Globe and Mail yesterday, it was stated: 
With Ontario's Ernie Eves and B.C.'s Andrew Petter leading the charge, the provincial ministers have made it clear that they consider Mr. Martin's recent $1.4 billion cut to unemployment insurance premiums insufficient...  
The premiers have insisted that they have some input into Ottawa's budget-making and how it allocates the surplus among new spending, tax cuts and debt repayment.  
In a telephone interview on Friday, Mr. Petter said the NDP government in British Columbia wants Ottawa to offset a dramatic increase in Canada Pension Plan premiums with reductions in UI premiums.  
"We're worried about the impact that Canada Pension Plan increases will have in terms of the burden they will impose on business and workers, and the potential they have to reduce job creation by a huge amount if they go ahead without some kind of offsetting relief," Mr. Petter said.  
Ontario's Conservative government is also demanding large cuts to UI premiums, Mr. Eves said in an interview...  
Alberta Treasurer Stockwell Day also indicated last week that he'll be pushing Mr. Martin for tax cuts.  
I predict today that, although this government has managed to get away with things for which our government would have been slaughtered, I think this bill, coupled with what is coming down the track and the changes in OAS and GIS, coupled with the arrogance of the stance taken at Kyoto, this is the kind of arrogance that, inevitably, will be the downfall of this government. 
I predict that that is about to happen.  
Hon. Thelma J. Chalifoux :
Honourable senators, I have a number of concerns regarding the statements of Senator Stratton. 
I would like to know what his position is on the working poor and on part-time workers. 
In this country, there are more part-time workers and more working poor than there are people who identify as middle class. 
 , provincial and territorial governments have agreed to address in a cooperative way the problems of low - income families with children .
 . families to - with children , the in territorial provincial address income Federal of and have cooperative agreed way a low problems
 the in to cooperative and have income low way Federal of address problems a . children with agreed , families - provincial territorial
 address low territorial agreed provincial with and way cooperative income - problems Federal , the . have families a of children governments in
Together we are now building the comprehensive and effective National Child Benefit System.  
 Together Child comprehensive System National Benefit . and effective we now building the are
 Child Benefit comprehensive . and building now National are Together the we effective System
 Child . Together are the National System we building now effective and Benefit comprehensive
 effective are National Benefit . comprehensive now we Child building System the and Together
 Child . comprehensive we System Together and building now National are Benefit effective the
 Together effective and we are . the Child System building National now comprehensive Benefit
 Child effective comprehensive are Together System now and we Benefit building the . National
 building . effective now and Child are National Benefit System the we comprehensive Together
 . effective comprehensive we and building Child now National Together are Benefit System the
 Child National Benefit and . we comprehensive effective now building the Together are System
 . and Benefit effective Together we System comprehensive now the Child building are National
 building and comprehensive Together Benefit we effective Child now are National the System .
 the are Benefit System National now Together building . effective Child we comprehensive and
 we System Together . Child building now are and comprehensive effective Benefit the National
 comprehensive effective System National building Benefit now the and Child . are we Together
 are Benefit now Child building effective National comprehensive the System . we and Together
Senator Bolduc :
When you talk about "accountability," I would suggest that that is second best. 
It is not a perfect situation, although you will have a parliamentary committee taking some responsibility. 
It is better than nothing but, in my opinion, it is second best.  
I am fairly sure that, in one way, the pure accountability we are talking about is quasi-impossible. 
Have different people manage different funds so that we will have some evaluation, some comparison and some diversification.  
Hon. Michael A. Meighen :
Honourable senators, this is precisely where I wanted clarification. 
Are you recommending that the fund be divided into four $25-billion portions and that so many firms administer each $25-billion portion in its entirety? 
Or are you recommending that one firm be responsible for one sector, such as the real estate sector and another firm be responsible for another sector?  
Senator Bolduc :
Honourable senators, in my opinion, it could be by sector, but my preference would be for the total to be broken down into four portions covering a variety of investments. 
Otherwise, if you have a block of $25 or $30 billion in real estate, you know what that means. 
Senator Meighen :
You mentioned decentralizing the decision-making process, did you not? 
Do you see any advantage to having decision-making centres such as the firm handling the $25-billion segment being located in different parts of the country?  
Senator Bolduc :
In Quebec, when the problem came up in connection with the pension plan in 1966, we insisted on having our own plan. 
I am not saying that this is how it should be across Canada; that is not my point. 
What I am saying is that, in Quebec, at the time, Jean Lesage had made it very clear that the fund was designed to provide social security. 
 Together we are now building the comprehensive and effective National Child System .
 are building effective and the . comprehensive Together National now we Child Benefit
 and . Benefit effective are building the Child Together now comprehensive we National
 Benefit and Child now comprehensive are effective building System Together . the National
The Government has already demonstrated its initial commitment to this project by increasing its contribution to the Canada Child Tax Benefit by $850 million a year, with higher payments to families beginning July 1, 1998. 
 July to 1998 by higher 1 Child The families . Tax has contribution increasing payments its demonstrated commitment Benefit already year $ project to 850 Canada to a initial the its beginning million , Government by , with this
 beginning has 1 families to year the project its by Canada The , initial higher Tax million Child 850 contribution $ . this , to by already payments July Government Benefit 1998 a demonstrated to with increasing commitment its
 $ The commitment Tax July 850 demonstrated its initial , Government to to Child , higher by a by contribution Canada . this million with year payments already has families to increasing the its beginning Benefit project 1998 1
 increasing commitment 1 1998 with by to the 850 The already July a to its Canada contribution has Tax families higher , Government by payments Child , $ this million beginning its demonstrated project . initial to year Benefit
 a contribution its , beginning , The initial project increasing the Child $ Benefit has year to this by million payments Canada demonstrated by 1998 850 its . families to higher to July Government already 1 Tax with commitment
 Child . this already by , to contribution to its initial higher Canada 1 families the project commitment to Government demonstrated with by Tax million , The $ 1998 increasing payments has a year July its 850 beginning Benefit
 , its payments , 850 Government Child year the The demonstrated July to this by with . already by 1 1998 initial project a to million $ Benefit contribution has families increasing commitment higher beginning Tax Canada its to
 higher contribution Canada initial Benefit Child . the its with families payments The by commitment increasing 1 demonstrated Government to , year its by a to project 1998 to July , this 850 already $ Tax million beginning has
 1998 beginning this payments 1 by , The initial . to its families Government Canada has increasing to Benefit year million project , $ commitment the July Tax to a by Child 850 with already demonstrated higher contribution its
 contribution families year , this has project 850 increasing higher initial 1998 The demonstrated by July beginning Child Benefit commitment by to $ million the 1 its payments with to to already Canada a Tax Government , . its
 by 1 , commitment beginning . its increasing already to to Child July a Government 1998 initial has demonstrated year Benefit 850 its by the million payments to , contribution families this Canada with Tax project The higher $
 with demonstrated $ initial by by year million the July 850 Benefit The . , 1 already commitment , contribution Government 1998 to beginning higher Tax Child its project families Canada payments this has to increasing to its a
 July . The to families year Child by Tax higher its increasing 1998 has 850 Canada payments demonstrated beginning Benefit Government initial this to 1 its to by already with $ , a million commitment project contribution the ,
 by payments Canada million Benefit 1998 Government July The families project 1 , its beginning year , with 850 the this . has a increasing to Tax already Child its initial to demonstrated to by higher commitment contribution $
 has increasing to July Government higher 1 by demonstrated The Child families 850 million to Benefit Tax project contribution 1998 , a to by the year this beginning $ . already its initial Canada payments its with commitment ,
 demonstrated , . with increasing a contribution families to Canada higher 1 has Government its Tax payments by its , commitment year by Benefit The $ Child July beginning project to to 1998 850 this the initial million already
He has followed three policy themes to accomplish that end.  
First, he has transferred much of the tax burden to the provinces, forcing what I call "downloaded increased taxes." 
Provincial and municipal governments, who were receiving less money, had to increase taxes. 
The government transferred debt.  
Second, this government has taken advantage of the low interest rates which resulted from the efforts of the Conservative government over eight years to bring the deficit and inflation under control and to bring interest rates down.  
Third, Paul Martin then not only raised licence fees and taxes, he used the accumulated surplus in the EI fund to pay down the deficit. 
It is this third policy theme with which we, on this side, feel most uncomfortable. 
He used the surplus in the EI fund, not to extend benefits, not to reduce premiums - which is normally what is done in a payroll deduction - but to cut benefits for a totally separate policy objective. 
He used this payroll tax purely and simply, to achieve his policy goal of cutting the deficit.  
That is why the Auditor General is prohibited from examining the fund unless the directors of the fund agree. 
It should not be for the directors to agree or disagree. 
Parliament must insist that the Auditor General report to us on the fund and on its administration. 
However, the Auditor General will report to the directors of the fund on how they manage their affairs. 
That is not acceptable.  
We are talking of $100 billion by the year 2006, and rapid increases thereafter. 
On this record, it will fail.  
It is an anomaly of governments to charge taxes for employment insurance premiums, and then reduce services to accumulate a surplus to pay down a deficit. 
It then writes cheques for something else. 
The government charges taxes for transportation then imposes user fees at airports and tolls on highways for the right to use the airports and highways that we have paid taxes to build and maintain. 
It imposes taxes to create historical sites and national parks and then charge people to get in. 
 The Government has already demonstrated its initial commitment this project by increasing its contribution to the Canada Child Tax Benefit by $ 850 million a year , with higher payments to families beginning July 1 , 1998 .
 families , payments the its with Tax Child demonstrated increasing $ Benefit , by 1 by to this contribution to The to year . 1998 its a has July initial beginning million higher Government Canada 850 already commitment
 year commitment this a 850 demonstrated Benefit project $ families by Government to the initial by increasing to 1998 million to Child Tax . , its Canada contribution , with higher July beginning payments has its The already
 demonstrated $ increasing , families 1 commitment a million year the 850 higher with Canada , its 1998 Child Benefit July its to to The Government already by project by beginning this has contribution to Tax . initial
The Government will work with its provincial and territorial partners to establish jointly a common timetable for increasing the federal contribution to the Canada Child Tax Benefit by at least an additional $850 million during the course of this mandate. 
 with timetable its federal million a the to increasing least during jointly the Government for and Tax will provincial Benefit Canada the contribution work at mandate . $ partners establish The additional common 850 this territorial course Child to an of by
 The federal an a territorial by Canada provincial Benefit with and the jointly Government Tax common . million 850 $ Child establish to partners for timetable least during the course to contribution will the additional at its of mandate this increasing work
 a with this Tax course additional its 850 common during mandate partners and work to timetable Canada by the the jointly increasing . at least establish Government to of $ territorial for Child federal Benefit the contribution an The provincial million will
 the by a during the its will Tax Government establish $ Benefit territorial mandate Child The jointly . and an course at common the work with for to federal increasing million least Canada of 850 timetable to partners provincial this contribution additional
 the the course establish jointly Child contribution least federal by its territorial The will a Tax partners Canada million and additional Benefit common increasing . 850 during at of to an mandate the with work this to $ timetable provincial for Government
 work establish million provincial Canada during of an the by Child this will to common at The to for increasing Benefit least . course the $ a with contribution territorial Tax jointly timetable and 850 federal Government the additional its partners mandate
 work The contribution to partners the common territorial of federal will Child with the increasing Tax and Benefit jointly million this the Canada . establish course additional provincial 850 to least an $ for its during by timetable at mandate Government a
 the 850 Canada additional common the The . and contribution increasing territorial by establish its million Tax during a with Benefit mandate least Child for jointly course will Government provincial to an work to timetable federal this of the at $ partners
 The during at provincial Tax for the territorial by partners federal Canada additional course . least a Child Benefit the with to its contribution establish work million the mandate will Government common and an timetable this to $ 850 of increasing jointly
 increasing work Tax to territorial contribution of The course the for its the Benefit mandate timetable . $ Government 850 jointly common and during partners Child establish the at provincial to with million additional an federal will a this Canada by least
 The a partners increasing by common timetable the federal this course jointly with Canada will Child to at least establish mandate Tax contribution during $ an of Government 850 work for territorial Benefit to provincial . the million additional the its and
 $ million Child at partners a the Government by timetable with Benefit will this for increasing jointly common Canada contribution The work 850 establish . least territorial mandate federal to course Tax its additional and during to the provincial an the of
 for timetable federal increasing Canada provincial additional . will the common least the 850 Government this mandate an Child course and the of million its $ work establish to a The with during territorial jointly contribution to Tax Benefit at partners by
 the the contribution the by and a for will provincial Tax common increasing work 850 of jointly $ to an with Benefit course establish federal The its timetable during . million partners mandate Government this to territorial Canada least at Child additional
 course Canada federal partners by an mandate increasing for work common additional the The 850 jointly territorial million the this to at . of during to least Benefit contribution Child the its with Tax timetable a provincial will and Government $ establish
 territorial of Child Government the Benefit additional by establish million will . $ 850 mandate common Tax and partners a its the increasing this work least timetable The at provincial to federal for jointly during with an course contribution the to Canada
Hon. Pierre De Bané :
Honourable senators, pursuant to rule 23(6) of the Senate, I have the honour to present, in both official languages, the reports of the Canadian section of the International Assembly of French-Speaking Parliamentarians as well as the financial report of the 23rd regular session of the IAFSP and its executive committee, held in Luxembourg from July 7 to July 10, 1997.  
Foreign Affairs 
Committee Authorized to Meet During Sitting of the Senate 
Hon. John B. Stewart :
Honourable senators, with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58(1)( a ), I move: 
That the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs have power to sit at 3:15 p.m. tomorrow, Wednesday, December 10, even though the Senate may then be sitting, and that rule 95(4) be suspended in relation thereto.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is leave granted, honourable senators?  
Hon. Noël A. Kinsella (Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition) :
Honourable senators, in the past two years or so, there has been a common understanding in this chamber that Wednesdays would constitute a short day. 
This is why we have been meeting at 1:30 p.m. The general understanding is that we try to finish our business in the chamber by about 3:30 p.m. 
In the past few weeks, we have heard requests like the one raised by the Honourable Senator Stewart. 
If the request speaks to a Tuesday or a Thursday, when we normally meet at 2 p.m. and sit a little longer, there would be no difficulty, all things being equal, in granting leave. 
However, I am having some difficulty in granting leave for a day when we are supposed to be having a short day in any event.  
I would ask the honourable Chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee if he would explain his motion in light of the fact that Wednesday is a short day.  
Senator Stewart :
Honourable senators, there are two points:
First, we are hoping tomorrow to have a timely assessment of the achievements of the APEC meetings.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
 The Government will work with its provincial and territorial partners to jointly a common timetable for increasing the federal contribution to the Canada Child Tax Benefit by at least an additional $ 850 million during the course of this mandate .
 a this course an establish territorial . timetable its partners to Benefit least at increasing of jointly provincial during Child Canada Tax work for 850 with mandate by will $ additional contribution common the the and Government the to federal million
 $ territorial least to Benefit federal common Tax timetable provincial with for . the the of its jointly million establish this additional mandate by will Government a at Child and an the Canada during increasing The 850 partners to contribution work
 its territorial . Government timetable during with course an mandate by to provincial at Canada $ Tax partners increasing establish this Benefit and work 850 will additional contribution least Child for The million the to federal of the common jointly the
The Government will also work with the provinces and territories to establish the National Re-Investment Framework to guide the reallocation of our partners' savings into new services and benefits for low-income families with children.  
 and also and to National with . provinces work ' reallocation with territories Framework partners services guide - will benefits the The our of for income into new the the savings children Government - low Investment establish Re families to
 of new ' Government into our The territories children for will Re . the with reallocation work - families low savings also guide and Framework benefits the to with provinces National establish services the income and partners - to Investment
 work The guide with benefits into our the and - partners with territories National of . new Investment families - for will to establish the income also to Government reallocation provinces the Re children services and low Framework savings '
 to into Investment - guide Framework income low families establish . with reallocation the National Government of The for Re children services new the work and provinces - and with our benefits territories will also ' partners savings the to
 Government reallocation our savings also guide and with into income - benefits the children partners National Framework the services and Investment with the The provinces of establish families to - Re to territories ' . work low for will new
 will Investment of work - also children benefits with low savings and to Framework the for partners reallocation territories guide National - and to income new the provinces services Re establish families our Government with . ' the The into
 Investment also the ' with The our provinces to families - into - . children and savings will guide partners the Government territories new income benefits and low for Framework Re establish of to work reallocation the with National services
 with for Framework territories - and to National to work Investment The low guide services children of our ' with . savings and Government the income provinces partners benefits - into establish the families also new reallocation Re the will
 the will and guide new establish to Framework into families . provinces benefits savings of Re for to ' income Investment with the territories children National - partners our with also low the reallocation work The Government and - services
 ' Investment the work to services low provinces establish the also benefits partners savings territories new reallocation with our will - National into Government to with The of children for Re and income and . Framework families - the guide
 and ' income into partners reallocation work with new the also establish services the - to Government Re our Investment savings will territories to for Framework low guide and . - The children of families with the provinces benefits National
 ' services guide - The Government Framework with partners reallocation . the also income to our establish of National to for work into provinces and benefits families children and Re the Investment territories new with the savings will - low
 provinces the Framework work - The Government - to the with establish for will benefits also Re reallocation the ' partners with territories Investment . families our and low new services income National children and of into to guide savings
 to the partners low Re establish the services . National Government to with - and benefits children of - into reallocation savings guide for territories our provinces new families and Framework the with also Investment ' will income The work
 . children and - The families also with provinces our Government Investment partners savings low income of establish benefits for to guide the the work into - will and new ' territories Re services Framework to the National with reallocation
 Investment National territories establish reallocation . benefits and guide into children for Re savings the and partners of provinces - the low The work our new the - services Framework to also Government to ' with with families will income
The government has said that we did it, as Tories. 
However, the Liberals were in power a lot longer, so they are much more responsible.  
Retirement and earnings tests for individuals were eliminated in 1974. 
Benefits were provided to male and female contributors, to surviving spouses and dependent children. 
However, instead of taking it out of general revenue, the government took it out of the CPP because, in the old days, there was lots of money in that fund. 
There were not as many old people. 
There was a great number of working people, and lots of cash. 
They said, "We can throw it around." 
No one was thinking what would happen when people in the large demographic group turned 65.  
The amendments provided for the elimination of CPP children's benefits which previously applied - they changed it again - where more than four children of a deceased or disabled contributor had been eligible for such benefits. 
Now, if you have more than four kids, that is fine, too. 
However, it was another increased cost to what should be a pension plan. 
The government should have taken the money out of something else, or increased the amount of CPP premiums so that people were told the truth, and also told, "To pay for this it will cost you 10 cents or 20 cents more a month." 
The cash was there, so they used that cash.  
Legislation was enacted for spousal credits. 
When people get divorced, they have to keep up with the times. 
They can split the benefits. 
That was not done before. 
At the inception of this program, that was not allowed.  
Because men die earlier and women live longer, the money went mostly to women. 
 The Government will also work with the provinces and territories to establish the National Re - Investment Framework to guide the reallocation of our partners ' savings into new services and benefits for low - income with children .
 services into new with National territories savings of will also our children . for and The provinces the to - ' Investment benefits and establish the work - guide reallocation Framework Re families income Government with to partners low
 and benefits also into our National provinces - savings to and . establish for Investment to the - new the children Re with reallocation territories Government services with of the work low guide income The will families ' Framework
 reallocation the Government the of establish with ' Framework Investment . and into for income - our with also and will families partners territories provinces children low services new to benefits the Re savings work The guide - to
We can make a difference in the lives of all our children. 
 a all lives make difference our children of the in We can .
 can in We our lives children all the . difference make of a
 children all the . difference make a our can of We lives in
 can a difference children . in of the our make all We lives
 a children of can our make the all . lives in difference We
 can . We all a difference in our lives children of make the
 lives all make children can our a of in difference the We .
 We make can a our of children lives . difference in the all
 a lives difference our . in can all the children We of make
 all in lives make children a We difference of our the can .
 a the in . children difference can We all make our lives of
 make children in difference all lives We can the . a of our
 difference can a in We our children . of lives the make all
 in our lives a We children make difference can all of . the
 in lives . the We can all children difference of our a make
 of . a lives all difference in children the We our make can
We are simply shovelling our hard-earned money into the greedy hands of Paul Martin, Minister of Finance, who wants to be the man who slays the deficit dragon, and we know how he intends to do it. 
He has followed three policy themes to accomplish that end.  
First, he has transferred much of the tax burden to the provinces, forcing what I call "downloaded increased taxes." 
Provincial and municipal governments, who were receiving less money, had to increase taxes. 
The government transferred debt.  
Second, this government has taken advantage of the low interest rates which resulted from the efforts of the Conservative government over eight years to bring the deficit and inflation under control and to bring interest rates down.  
Third, Paul Martin then not only raised licence fees and taxes, he used the accumulated surplus in the EI fund to pay down the deficit. 
It is this third policy theme with which we, on this side, feel most uncomfortable. 
He used the surplus in the EI fund, not to extend benefits, not to reduce premiums - which is normally what is done in a payroll deduction - but to cut benefits for a totally separate policy objective. 
He used this payroll tax purely and simply, to achieve his policy goal of cutting the deficit.  
That is why the Auditor General is prohibited from examining the fund unless the directors of the fund agree. 
It should not be for the directors to agree or disagree. 
Parliament must insist that the Auditor General report to us on the fund and on its administration. 
However, the Auditor General will report to the directors of the fund on how they manage their affairs. 
That is not acceptable.  
We are talking of $100 billion by the year 2006, and rapid increases thereafter. 
On this record, it will fail.  
It is an anomaly of governments to charge taxes for employment insurance premiums, and then reduce services to accumulate a surplus to pay down a deficit. 
It then writes cheques for something else. 
The government charges taxes for transportation then imposes user fees at airports and tolls on highways for the right to use the airports and highways that we have paid taxes to build and maintain. 
 We can make a difference in the lives of our children .
 a the all make lives children can difference our of . We
 a . in all the our of difference lives can children make
 lives a difference make in the We of all can . children
Children need a substantial investment of time and attention for healthy development; they need strong families; they need safe, supportive communities. 
 ; supportive families they need safe Children substantial investment attention for time a need development , . ; strong need healthy of communities and they
 time ; strong Children ; need supportive and attention they safe . communities investment development for need , substantial families a healthy need they of
 they time a communities need , supportive strong families ; safe need for they development . substantial need attention of investment Children and ; healthy
 for healthy communities investment they , need a safe and of ; need Children strong they . supportive development families attention time need ; substantial
 ; development , safe ; healthy supportive need of a need investment families time they Children strong communities attention . and substantial they need for
 they . families for investment supportive ; Children safe strong a communities need they substantial development of and time need healthy , need ; attention
 ; of Children communities . and need need need ; they for families attention substantial development a healthy investment they , time supportive safe strong
 ; for attention and Children ; communities supportive healthy a development safe strong they need , . investment of need time they substantial need families
 communities ; safe they ; substantial development need they and supportive investment of , strong healthy need . need Children families a attention for time
 investment of need Children and development substantial for healthy supportive strong a , ; need need they attention ; families they time communities safe .
 need families Children development need for time supportive of , investment safe communities ; they . healthy need they attention strong a substantial and ;
 families of need ; healthy . development attention a Children need they communities for and , substantial supportive they strong need time ; investment safe
 need ; attention they strong . a substantial investment need for , families Children need development ; time communities they and healthy of supportive safe
 healthy communities families strong safe . supportive Children investment a development of attention ; need they time need need ; , and they substantial for
 , time and need families ; a strong . supportive ; communities Children they need they of substantial for attention need investment healthy development safe
 time ; ; need healthy safe of a . investment they development substantial supportive and need communities Children they for families strong attention , need
I predict today that, although this government has managed to get away with things for which our government would have been slaughtered, I think this bill, coupled with what is coming down the track and the changes in OAS and GIS, coupled with the arrogance of the stance taken at Kyoto, this is the kind of arrogance that, inevitably, will be the downfall of this government. 
I predict that that is about to happen.  
Hon. Thelma J. Chalifoux :
Honourable senators, I have a number of concerns regarding the statements of Senator Stratton. 
I would like to know what his position is on the working poor and on part-time workers. 
In this country, there are more part-time workers and more working poor than there are people who identify as middle class. 
What is the honourable senator's opinion on that?  
In this country, we have a totally isolated segment of society which is called "the mid-Canada corridor." 
Even in terms of communications, there is very little. 
What would the honourable senator do in the area of communication for those in isolated settlements regarding private pension plans? 
There are no words in Cree or michif for "private pension plan."  
I was a member of the working poor in 1965 and 1966 when this plan was put into force. 
I did not agree with the Canada Pension Plan. 
However, I will guarantee honourable senators right now that I totally agree with deductions being made, because now at least I have a pension.  
What will happen if this plan goes through is that the people in this country who really need it will get it. 
They have to travel 240 kilometres to the closest bank. 
Many do not speak English. 
What would you do in this case for these people who have nothing?  
Some Hon. Senators :
Hear, hear!  
 Children need a substantial investment of time and attention for healthy development ; they need strong families ; they need safe , supportive communities
 and of strong time need healthy they they attention development ; need safe . supportive Children , communities substantial ; a need investment for
 need development attention substantial families a they and supportive need for ; , safe strong of need they communities time investment ; . Children
 . , substantial supportive time safe attention for strong healthy need need ; of a they development communities they investment Children need and families
The federal, provincial and territorial governments agreed in January 1997 to work together to develop the National Children's Agenda, a comprehensive strategy to improve the well-being of Canada's children.  
 strategy of , being in territorial agreed to ' work improve Children the comprehensive January - to s Agenda National ' Canada 1997 provincial , children governments . s together and to federal well a develop The the
 Canada improve 1997 governments the s to and together strategy Children National territorial comprehensive Agenda January children federal - agreed develop in the , of work being to ' to s ' well The provincial a . ,
 develop a the to federal to , Children agreed governments s 1997 Canada , Agenda comprehensive ' in National The well and territorial strategy to provincial work together children - s . being ' of January the improve
 ' and to , develop strategy The federal provincial s 1997 the improve ' the agreed s Canada together well to . to governments of Children Agenda in children January work comprehensive National being territorial a - ,
 January and being . ' Canada Children together in the s well children develop , governments Agenda National to to work improve federal , s a to 1997 provincial agreed The the of strategy territorial comprehensive ' -
 to Canada improve federal . National - The Children , the in strategy of 1997 s well develop , to ' being a work provincial and s Agenda comprehensive ' governments together agreed the January territorial children to
 Children to ' federal together Canada territorial comprehensive to , National s strategy January to governments - provincial in and agreed well work being ' The the the Agenda improve 1997 of children . a s , develop
 governments improve to National territorial in . provincial develop to being the together a s Canada and 1997 s , strategy work - to federal The the agreed children ' , comprehensive of January Children well Agenda '
 together - Children governments National the agreed ' Agenda territorial the develop s of provincial The January a 1997 to and children , Canada ' to comprehensive well to s being in work improve , strategy federal .
 being territorial and in children of 1997 ' well - a work National The Canada Agenda to January the provincial to s , strategy Children develop governments to s comprehensive the . agreed together improve federal ' ,
 governments in to , , National improve ' s provincial to ' the the Canada s The together Agenda 1997 to - Children work being January of well territorial and children develop . federal strategy comprehensive a agreed
 territorial Canada , the 1997 a governments being to the work strategy and to agreed ' s develop - , of The January to well s ' together children provincial comprehensive Agenda National in Children . federal improve
 a in the , National to January governments Agenda ' and well develop s being ' together . territorial s to , federal to The work 1997 - improve provincial comprehensive strategy Children Canada of children agreed the
 and Canada develop together s strategy provincial s well governments ' children to The , to , the January the agreed Children federal to . of work Agenda National territorial - a ' being in comprehensive improve 1997
 The National governments s ' children the provincial improve well to Agenda a s work being agreed territorial to strategy 1997 , comprehensive - and in federal together Children develop Canada the of . to , January '
 s develop federal work Agenda children being governments and 1997 , Canada Children ' to in to strategy territorial ' together - provincial comprehensive National agreed to , a January improve the . well The s of the
Human Resources Development 
Changes to Canada Pension Plan-Accountability and Transparency of Investment Board-Undertaking to Publish Quarterly Financial Statements-Government Position 
(Response to question raised by Hon. Donald H. Oliver on November 25, 1997) 
Bill C-2 requires that the Board prepare unaudited quarterly statements and provide them to the federal and provincial Ministers of Finance. 
The Board may choose to make those statements directly available to the public but the legislation does not require this.  
During the consultations on the draft CPP legislation, including House of Commons Finance Committee hearings, several pension fund experts recommended against publishing quarterly statements. 
They argued that the routine publication of quarterly results could tend to draw attention away from the longer-term investment objectives of the Board. 
Other large pension funds like the Ontario Municipal Employees Retirement System and the Ontario Teachers Pension Plan do not publish their quarterly results for these reasons. 
For a pension fund, long-term investment performance is paramount.  
Changes to Canada Pension Plan-Investment Board Not Subject to Access to Information Act-Government Position 
(Response to question raised by Donald H. Oliver on November 19, 1997) 
Applying the Access to Information Act to the CPP Investment Board would be inappropriate.  
The Board's mandate is to invest CPP funds at arm's length from governments in the best interest of plan members. 
As an investment institution, much of its day-to-day activities will be commercially sensitive and would be exempt under ATI in any event.  
While ATI does not apply to the CPP Investment Board, by legislation and regulations the Board's operations will be very transparent and it will be subject to close public scrutiny.  
For example, the Board will be required to: 
- make public its investment policies, code of conduct, corporate governance practices, proxy voting guidelines, and by-laws 
- disclose the compensation of the five most highly compensated officers of the Board 
- prepare quarterly financial statements that will be sent to federal and provincial Finance Ministers, and an annual report that will be tabled in Parliament 
- hold regular public meetings in each participating province to allow for public discussion and input 
 The federal , provincial and territorial governments agreed in January to work together to develop the National Children ' s Agenda , a comprehensive strategy to improve the well - being of Canada ' s children .
 a agreed ' to comprehensive governments 1997 , Children to children territorial Canada , January in The s work Agenda the improve strategy - . federal National together to being and s well develop ' of provincial
 , s to the in to provincial governments well agreed being , National together the January ' children s The territorial work comprehensive improve Agenda develop Canada a Children 1997 strategy - to of . federal and
 agreed develop , National work and to in comprehensive of to together s provincial being to a Children federal the . , Canada 1997 the January children well Agenda The - ' governments improve strategy ' territorial
Federal, provincial and territorial governments will work together to develop this broader agenda for children, including clear outcome measures by which to gauge success. 
 outcome Federal work to to , . children will this , broader clear including agenda success territorial measures gauge for by develop governments together which provincial and
 develop this , measures agenda children together , will Federal for and territorial success including to gauge which work clear outcome . governments by broader provincial to
 Federal to , to and measures will broader . success outcome work develop children , agenda territorial which by provincial this together gauge governments clear for including
 by and which broader , , work this . agenda together governments including clear measures children develop success to territorial for outcome will to gauge Federal provincial
 . will develop work territorial provincial gauge together clear outcome which for including , to , to agenda broader measures success Federal by governments children and this
 agenda to work , by which . territorial clear outcome gauge measures to and provincial including this , for broader governments develop together success will children Federal
 including develop together , to governments Federal children territorial outcome broader by for clear success , this gauge will to agenda measures provincial and work . which
 to . , broader provincial including and territorial , together gauge which measures outcome to work governments this for by will clear success Federal agenda children develop
 provincial agenda . will develop broader including children governments success to , this to work , together Federal territorial and outcome for gauge measures by clear which
 broader to governments which Federal will gauge work together by children , success clear measures . this provincial , and for including outcome territorial agenda to develop
 success by to together broader which Federal this . develop outcome children provincial governments to measures will , territorial agenda clear including work , and gauge for
 will including . governments develop provincial and clear to gauge children territorial measures work which outcome this broader success to , Federal for together agenda , by
 to including this territorial children work outcome to measures provincial develop which , gauge Federal . and by , for success agenda together clear governments broader will
 to , measures territorial , to Federal . governments including agenda will together this develop success broader gauge and work provincial by outcome clear which for children
 governments will together develop by provincial , success Federal this . clear children and which outcome territorial including to , agenda to work for measures gauge broader
 by broader gauge success provincial agenda develop , which Federal work , governments for including measures to children will territorial . to this outcome clear and together
He said that he did not ask the parents whether they were for or against the amendment to section 93.  
This is one of the largest groups in Quebec. 
If Mr. Stronach is part of the "for" or "against" theory, then there is a problem with the whole concept put forth by my honourable friend.  
My honourable friend spoke of the Estates General, but he did not refer to their minority report, which covered over 70 per cent of their membership. 
Why are my figures different from those of my honourable friend?  
Senator Grafstein :
Again, honourable senators, this is a question of evidence. 
I refer all senators to the transcript.  
I wish to speak specifically about the fact that we are dealing with elites as opposed to the groups they represent. 
We questioned these representatives during the hearings as to whether their underlying groups agreed with the position they had taken.  
On the Catholic side, we had the position of the archbishops, as limited as it was. 
We had Catholic school boards and Catholic teachers. 
I remember specifically cross-examining Catholic teachers and asking whether they had discussions with students and their parents respecting the changes. 
Their view was that they represented the broad consensus of parents and students as it applied to this amendment. 
All parents wanted a change to renovate the school system, and this was the best modality in which to do that.  
I agree with Senator Lynch-Staunton, Senator Wood and Senator Lavoie-Roux that this is not perfect. 
However, in addition to the evidence, we did refer to opinion polls that seemed to suggest a strong support for reform along these lines.  
Yes, the resolution is imperfect. 
We would like to have done it "our way," as Frank Sinatra used to say, but we must deal with the Province of Quebec in this case. 
We had to bend imperfect tools to see whether they fit our minimum requirements. 
 Federal , provincial and territorial governments will work together to develop this broader agenda for , including clear outcome measures by which to gauge success .
 by to and to broader clear for governments which success . , this children together work measures develop provincial territorial Federal , gauge outcome will including
 . and clear will for to , broader develop territorial which by to , measures children this Federal gauge outcome provincial agenda success including governments work
 clear and broader , which . Federal to for agenda , will work including this gauge measures develop to territorial together provincial outcome governments children success
As part of this national agenda, the federal government will undertake three new initiatives: 
 As government part national new this : initiatives three undertake agenda of will , the federal
 will three federal initiatives the As undertake part this national new agenda of , : government
 As national : of government part the undertake three agenda federal , initiatives new this will
 , initiatives three of : part national federal undertake As new this will agenda the government
 , new three part of national the this government federal undertake As : agenda will initiatives
 the federal part As , three new this national undertake will of government initiatives agenda :
 the federal this initiatives new part national , As undertake three of government : will agenda
 As : of undertake part government , this national federal new the three agenda will initiatives
 part initiatives will agenda : this As undertake of , three government the federal national new
 part will national new : agenda government undertake , of federal this As three initiatives the
 undertake three part this new initiatives : federal will agenda national the , As of government
 new of part : federal national three As undertake , will the initiatives this government agenda
 of national new federal , the agenda part government undertake will As initiatives three this :
 agenda government new As federal of the national this initiatives undertake : three , will part
 this initiatives government the federal , of part will undertake new three agenda : As national
 will agenda federal the this national of , government three part initiatives : As new undertake
This concerns employment insurance and the reserve. 
It states: 
A reserve is necessary, since it makes it possible to apply more stable premium rates throughout the economic cycle, thus making it possible to avoid increasing them in a recessionary period. 
In addition, the reserve makes it possible to ensure there are sufficient funds to pay benefits when they are most necessary.  
What happened in the last recession was a $2 billion surplus in the Employment Insurance Account turned into a $6 billion deficit in two years, and it was necessary to increase premiums by 30% at what was already a difficult time for job creation. 
Consequently, the government believes that it is wise to establish a reserve in the Employment Insurance Account.  
I am assuming that since you have given me this response, that was indeed the strategy on the part of the government.  
I then went on to say: 
If I may, I will quote from The Financial Post of today, November 26, a 1997. 
An editorial entitled "EI surplus is a deficit-reduction tax" states clearly that the EI will result: 
...in an accumulated surplus suspected to top a scandalous $19 billion by the end of 1998. 
If you need $8 billion to look after a recession, using the last recession as the example, what kind of recession are you planning on?  
That is to say, what kind of recession are they planning on in the future with a reserve of $18 billion?  
Provincial finance ministers met in Ottawa. 
I think last night they had dinner with Finance Minister Paul Martin. 
In an article in The Globe and Mail yesterday, it was stated: 
With Ontario's Ernie Eves and B.C.'s Andrew Petter leading the charge, the provincial ministers have made it clear that they consider Mr. Martin's recent $1.4 billion cut to unemployment insurance premiums insufficient...  
The premiers have insisted that they have some input into Ottawa's budget-making and how it allocates the surplus among new spending, tax cuts and debt repayment.  
In a telephone interview on Friday, Mr. Petter said the NDP government in British Columbia wants Ottawa to offset a dramatic increase in Canada Pension Plan premiums with reductions in UI premiums.  
"We're worried about the impact that Canada Pension Plan increases will have in terms of the burden they will impose on business and workers, and the potential they have to reduce job creation by a huge amount if they go ahead without some kind of offsetting relief," Mr. Petter said.  
 As of this national agenda , the federal government will undertake three new initiatives :
 government agenda initiatives of : will part new undertake this national the federal three ,
 undertake As national initiatives : part new agenda the this will of , government three
 , three the As undertake federal new of part initiatives will : agenda national this
It will establish Centres of Excellence to deepen our understanding of children's development and well-being and to improve our ability to respond to their needs.  
 of to of deepen children s . to our their well - being ' needs Excellence respond Centres development ability our establish will improve It to and and to understanding
 - respond s establish and of children will to to and understanding to Excellence of needs development our being to . well It ability our ' their improve Centres deepen
 to establish to of children improve and being deepen Excellence our ' Centres of development our ability It to understanding well - respond their to . will needs s and
 - It of our . their to to and Excellence children our development s needs being and well to to improve understanding will of respond ' ability Centres deepen establish
 to well development - to . to of being ' will Centres our needs deepen ability understanding of and Excellence improve It to respond their and children s establish our
 deepen of It our of to development to and Centres respond children . being s ' well needs to will Excellence and to improve our - establish understanding ability their
 their well . needs improve of It being deepen Excellence - of ' our and respond understanding to our will ability to Centres children to s and development to establish
 . of It will needs well - of and ability development being to understanding and their to to respond Excellence our deepen Centres s to our improve ' children establish
 to needs to establish our their understanding being ' children to will ability respond to and of and Centres improve our well deepen Excellence - s . development It of
 our to and . s children development and well ' understanding being ability improve of to to It of our Centres their Excellence to deepen respond establish - will needs
 improve ability understanding development respond of needs children Centres to . deepen will and and establish their ' to well - s to being our of It Excellence to our
 and respond to will establish - well s our Excellence development of being deepen It ability to . needs and of their to ' Centres understanding to children our improve
 being . children understanding needs respond well our our of deepen ' It to s to and will and - establish development Excellence Centres ability improve to to of their
 respond their ' to our to It deepen will needs establish Excellence . well and being to and - children improve Centres of of understanding s to ability our development
 their children of our well will Excellence It respond understanding to establish to - being to improve needs ' and ability our and development to s of . deepen Centres
 of It needs establish being to of respond s ' Centres development well to improve understanding will - to ability . our Excellence children and to and our deepen their
- prepare quarterly financial statements that will be sent to federal and provincial Finance Ministers, and an annual report that will be tabled in Parliament 
- hold regular public meetings in each participating province to allow for public discussion and input 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
Commemoration of Fiftieth Anniversary-Plans of Government 
(Response to question raised by Hon. Noël A. Kinsella on October 23, 1997) 
The 50th Anniversary provides Canadians an opportunity to reflect on the importance of human rights in the life of the country, as they are a fundamental unifying value and an important part of our legacy to future generations.  
The objectives of the commemoration are to promote respect for human rights and responsibilities; mark Canada's national and international progress in implementing human rights standards; develop innovative and responsive approaches to emerging human rights issues; and, to link values highly esteemed by Canadians - values such as respect for the rule of law, dignity of the person, fairness, equitable treatment and democratic participation - to a broader government agenda related to social cohesion and social justice.  
Activities planned around December 10, 1997 for the launch of the 50th Anniversary commemorative year of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) 
National Defence 
Lack of Helicopter for Number of Navy Frigates-Government Position 
(Response to question raised by Hon. J. Michael Forrestall on November 20, 1997) 
An eleventh detachment is required for Canada's full time commitment of one ship to NATO's Standing Naval Force Atlantic.  
Maritime Command employs a three-tiered approach to fleet readiness: ships fulfilling national commitments are at High Readiness; ships in refit or major maintenance periods are at Extended Readiness; and, the remainder of the fleet is at Normal Readiness. 
Ships at Normal or Extended Readiness do not normally require Sea King detachments to fulfill their operational role. 
As well, certain taskings such as sovereignty, coastal and fisheries patrols may not require a Sea King detachment. 
Therefore, ships can be deployed at sea and operationally ready for a mission without a Sea King detachment embarked.  
Forestry 
Demolition of Government Laboratories-Possibility of Restoration of Funding-Government Position 
(Response to question raised by Hon. Mira Spivak on November 20, 1997) 
In response to the federal government's Program Review, the Canadian Forest Service (CFS) underwent strategic restructuring to rationalize its operations and to reduce infrastructure costs in the interest of providing maximum funding to research within the context of a reduced operating budget. 
 It will establish Centres of Excellence to deepen understanding of children ' s development and well - being and to improve our ability to respond to their needs .
 understanding to of needs our ability respond being children establish - ' well will and development . deepen Centres their of Excellence to to and improve s our to
 children and Centres - Excellence ' establish of to ability understanding to of to development . deepen to will our their needs and respond s our being improve It
 Centres deepen to well s respond their understanding to and being Excellence of development ' our and of will children our establish to to needs It - ability improve
It will expand our Aboriginal Head Start program onto reserves to ensure that all Aboriginal children have the opportunity to get a good start in life.  
 get life program Head to onto Aboriginal to our good It Aboriginal expand Start ensure the opportunity . that have reserves children start all in a will
 Head the to ensure life children have onto get to . all It Start Aboriginal Aboriginal that will program good start opportunity our reserves expand a in
 onto children It Start expand that to have will . ensure Aboriginal start opportunity a the in good Head program reserves all get our Aboriginal to life
 reserves children onto life . have Aboriginal good all will start Start Aboriginal the our a ensure expand It to that Head program opportunity get in to
 to in ensure get opportunity the start Aboriginal all . to Start life onto have our that will reserves Aboriginal program children It Head a expand good
 the Start ensure onto will expand our all reserves children program Aboriginal to opportunity start that to Aboriginal have good Head It in a life get .
 get the good . children It Aboriginal our start reserves onto program will have Start opportunity life in a Aboriginal to ensure Head all to expand that
 in Aboriginal have . a program Head to onto ensure Start all life get children that our to It start expand the good reserves opportunity Aboriginal will
 ensure all to onto children get start Aboriginal expand Start It good the our program life Head in a have will opportunity Aboriginal that reserves . to
 program that It Aboriginal opportunity reserves the to will to in onto life Aboriginal expand . children good get ensure a start Head our all Start have
 program opportunity Start It start Head a that life Aboriginal get will onto ensure Aboriginal to the children . to in our expand all good have reserves
 onto . to to It good in all our the expand ensure will have that life Aboriginal opportunity get program reserves start Start a Aboriginal children Head
 will that start life Head children good opportunity ensure to Aboriginal the It program in Start . a reserves all to our Aboriginal expand onto get have
 It our opportunity reserves program children to onto Start Aboriginal will in that life ensure the Aboriginal to . get expand all Head start have good a
 to children to start Aboriginal program good life the reserves opportunity have our onto Head in . that It Start a get expand will all ensure Aboriginal
 program reserves have to all Start good will to Aboriginal our . life get in start opportunity It that children expand a Head ensure onto Aboriginal the
I hope one day we will have nothing worse than Mr. Sorros' manoeuvres to criticize.  
The regulations governing investments and the behaviour of administrators have not been revealed. 
They are not ready. 
What guidelines will there be for administrators? 
A parliamentary review is therefore vital before their implementation.  
In concluding, I would say to the government that the preferable alternative to its bill would be to simply oblige everyone in the labour force in Canada to invest a percentage of their savings in funds under private management or let government assume its role by providing a safety net for those who could not set aside enough money for their old age.  
Here is an intelligent response to the challenge before us. 
However, and it is regrettable in this era of the welfare state, it seems to me that we prefer to make sweeping rules that apply to everyone in order to resolve the problem of a few.  
Hon. Philippe Deane Gigantès :
You talk with admiration of private investment management. 
How do you explain the disaster at Olympia & York, for example, under the management of Mr. Eyton, our colleague, and the fact that major players like Conrad Black closed Dominion Stores and took the money Dominion Stores employees had invested in a pension fund, a fund they never drew from? 
Are you telling us that the private sector will be more generous and wise than the Caisse de dépôt in Quebec? 
Senator Bolduc :
I did not say disasters did not happen in the private sector. 
Senator Gigantès :
It is not a big deal if you have $3 million, but it is if you lose $35,000 or $70,000 and this is all the money you have. 
It may not be a big deal for you, but it is for small investors.  
Senator Bolduc :
Honourable senators, I never said there would not be any damage in the private sector. 
Some damage is done every day. 
 It will expand our Aboriginal Head Start program reserves to ensure that all Aboriginal children have the opportunity to get a good start in life .
 It to start a reserves . ensure our program have get onto opportunity will to that the in life Head good Aboriginal children expand Start Aboriginal
 get It to a ensure that start children to Aboriginal program will our expand Aboriginal the Head life good in . all onto opportunity Start have
 have . to expand onto get to in It children will program Head Aboriginal the ensure that Aboriginal reserves opportunity all start good Start a life
It will measure and report regularly on the readiness of Canadian children to learn, so that we can assess our progress in providing our children with the best possible start.  
 It the , providing will best Canadian assess of to can report so we the children that with learn regularly on our readiness children . our measure and in possible start progress
 measure , readiness children will learn our with It assess providing we Canadian on . to start the in and so possible children our of that the best regularly progress report can
 children and that possible will best our the our on we learn regularly to , in so providing . can It children with readiness report progress start the of Canadian measure assess
 . readiness regularly to the It will of possible , report so Canadian on our assess learn and best with children that our start children in measure can the progress providing we
 can so to possible regularly best readiness the our assess the . progress providing our children that we on and of in It learn Canadian with will , start children report measure
 start of that readiness can our best assess Canadian It we in providing so progress children to our the regularly . on , and children with measure report learn possible will the
 we assess that can with best the , in possible providing of progress Canadian . regularly to the and measure report our children our start will so It children on readiness learn
 can It on . providing assess Canadian that regularly in , so measure of readiness learn and the possible with start children our best to our report the progress will we children
 with measure learn best It so our progress . possible assess children providing , report on to we regularly the of Canadian the and can in children start readiness our will that
 in , will progress the readiness so Canadian of can with to our that measure regularly providing learn report children It our . best and children on start the we possible assess
 that Canadian in to readiness It can with our report , learn we children our start and of providing regularly will children so the . progress the on best measure possible assess
 , It readiness measure with report learn to so on . the of regularly Canadian in we the that our and possible progress can our will best assess children start children providing
 children children measure so providing Canadian . our that and can progress report will in learn possible best readiness with we to of assess regularly , on It the the our start
 children so . children report will in our regularly the can providing of start measure possible best readiness on the assess Canadian progress , and It with we to our that learn
 It readiness the our start our so and Canadian best that of measure we will the . with on learn providing assess can progress to children regularly report possible children , in
 Canadian It possible , will assess . on so regularly measure the of that our children readiness providing children best our and we the in start can progress with report to learn
That is what we need to tell them at Christmas when we go home; not that we passed the bill.  
Hon. Roch Bolduc :
Honourable senators, I will not go back over the very important points raised by my colleague with respect to the intergenerational inequity in this bill. 
I would like to look at other aspects of the problem.  
Honourable senators, the government is proposing to amend the CPP. 
I would have found it appropriate to examine all the major aspects of the plan at this time. 
This has been done for some important facets such as its survival, its management and its performance. 
I will address these shortly.  
This strikes me as an important question. 
Why, for instance, if I do not wish to contribute and prefer to look after my own financial security, should I be obliged by law to participate in the plan, even if I am prepared to sign a document absolving the government of all responsibility on my account? 
Why must everyone belong to a plan whose money will be invested by others, by public servants?  
The government's response to this fundamental question is obligatory collectivization. 
The government seems to assume that Canadians are irresponsible, ignorant, and improvident, and that big brother in Ottawa knows best.  
If he is so competent, what has this big brother been doing for 20 years? 
He agreed to give pension benefits to people, but forgot to levy what he needed to be able to do so, and what he levied, he loaned to the provinces at such low rates that, unless there are drastic changes, the plan will go bankrupt.  
Here we have a classic case of public mismanagement. 
On the one hand, they hand out goodies and, on the other, they forget to charge for them. 
And now they have learned nothing from this sad tale:
Ottawa is asking for even more from everyone and tells us that this time it will invest the money wisely and that it will be for the future good of all.  
Honourable senators, I would much more prefer looking after my own retirement, and I know many Canadians who would like to be free to do what they want with their own money.  
 It will measure and report regularly on the readiness of Canadian children to learn , so that we can assess our progress in providing our children with the best start .
 the readiness in children can providing It so our . assess and learn Canadian possible with on that report the best we measure to children will , of start progress regularly
 that possible . of can in learn and children children measure Canadian best report the start providing , on readiness our assess will with regularly the progress It our so we
 on in report readiness Canadian . assess the regularly so start that our we measure with , will possible of children It the progress and can learn to best our providing
Investing in Quality Care and Good Health 
 Investing Care Quality in Health Good and
 Care Investing and in Health Quality Good
 Investing Health Quality and Care in Good
 and Health Care Investing Quality in Good
 Care Investing and Good Quality in Health
 Good in Care and Health Quality Investing
 Good in Health Investing Quality and Care
 Investing and Good Health in Care Quality
 Good Investing in Quality Care Health and
 in Quality Care Good Investing Health and
 Health in Investing and Good Quality Care
 Health in Care Quality and Investing Good
 Investing Quality in Health and Care Good
 in Care Health Investing Quality Good and
 Quality Good Care in Health Investing and
 Good Investing and Care in Health Quality
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
I do not want to unduly prolong the debate, but I have another question for Senator Robichaud. 
Since we did not get answers to certain questions, would you agree to invite the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs, who is the sponsor of this resolution, to appear before the Senate in committee of the whole? 
We would like him to give us certain assurances before we make a decision on this issue?  
Senator Robichaud :
Honourable senators, the minister who is the sponsor of the resolution has already appeared before the joint committee. 
He came at the beginning and at the end of the hearings, and my honourable colleague was there to ask him questions on the issues that were of concern to him.  
If the honourable senator did not get answers to all his questions, that is an entirely different matter. 
On motion of Senator Kinsella, for Senator Simard, debate adjourned.  
Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration 
Sixth Report of Committee Adopted 
The Senate proceeded to consideration of the sixth report of the Standing Committee on Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration (budgets for certain committees), presented in the Senate on December 4, 1997.  
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, I move, on behalf of Senator Rompkey, the adoption of this report.  
Motion agreed to and report adopted.  
Telecommunications Act Teleglobe Canada Reorganization and Divestiture Act 
Bill to Amend-First Reading 
The Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C-17, to amend the Telecommunications Act and the Teleglobe Canada Reorganization and Divestiture Act. 
Bill read first time.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
 Investing in Care and Good Health
 Care Investing in Quality Health and
 and Quality Care Health Good in
 Health Investing Quality Good in Care
Nonetheless, there is an increasing anxiety among Canadians about the present state and the future of our medicare system. 
 increasing our about present state anxiety among the medicare there , is of system the future and Canadians an Nonetheless .
 is of and there an present Nonetheless among future about system anxiety our . state the the , increasing Canadians medicare
 system present an , among about Canadians there is the increasing of . and our future state Nonetheless medicare anxiety the
 , present . medicare is system the the an and future our Canadians about state of there among anxiety Nonetheless increasing
 the of the system increasing , and present state about Canadians anxiety . there medicare our Nonetheless is future an among
 the system present Nonetheless . among future the an state increasing there Canadians , of anxiety about our and is medicare
 among the increasing our is medicare an Nonetheless state Canadians . there the future about of present , anxiety and system
 an future system Nonetheless among . anxiety medicare increasing the the state Canadians of is there present about , and our
 Nonetheless and of increasing future there an about the system present , medicare . the our Canadians state anxiety is among
 anxiety is our system state and Canadians . of there Nonetheless the about an future medicare among , the increasing present
 increasing future there is state medicare Canadians among anxiety of , present system an the about and Nonetheless the our .
 . among future medicare Nonetheless the there an anxiety the our Canadians of , about present state is system and increasing
 present among future is there and state Canadians medicare an the our , the about system Nonetheless anxiety increasing . of
 system is among increasing the future Nonetheless and about an Canadians . our anxiety state there present medicare the , of
 the is there and medicare future Canadians among system present the an about state . of , anxiety increasing our Nonetheless
 the . system about the an present increasing , future is there medicare Canadians among and Nonetheless of anxiety state our
Le Fédération des comités des parents de la province de Québec is a group mandated by the National Assembly to represent all parents and all schools in Quebec. 
They appeared before the committee. 
The president, Mr. Gary Stronach, when asked if the membership was aware, stated - and this is in his letter - that he did not ask his membership for their views. 
He said that he did not ask the parents whether they were for or against the amendment to section 93.  
This is one of the largest groups in Quebec. 
If Mr. Stronach is part of the "for" or "against" theory, then there is a problem with the whole concept put forth by my honourable friend.  
My honourable friend spoke of the Estates General, but he did not refer to their minority report, which covered over 70 per cent of their membership. 
Why are my figures different from those of my honourable friend?  
Senator Grafstein :
Again, honourable senators, this is a question of evidence. 
I refer all senators to the transcript.  
I wish to speak specifically about the fact that we are dealing with elites as opposed to the groups they represent. 
We questioned these representatives during the hearings as to whether their underlying groups agreed with the position they had taken.  
On the Catholic side, we had the position of the archbishops, as limited as it was. 
We had Catholic school boards and Catholic teachers. 
I remember specifically cross-examining Catholic teachers and asking whether they had discussions with students and their parents respecting the changes. 
Their view was that they represented the broad consensus of parents and students as it applied to this amendment. 
All parents wanted a change to renovate the school system, and this was the best modality in which to do that.  
I agree with Senator Lynch-Staunton, Senator Wood and Senator Lavoie-Roux that this is not perfect. 
However, in addition to the evidence, we did refer to opinion polls that seemed to suggest a strong support for reform along these lines.  
 Nonetheless , there is an increasing anxiety among Canadians about the present state and the future of our system .
 increasing system , anxiety future the among present there state Canadians the our and an medicare about Nonetheless of is
 is system . future an our the medicare there the Nonetheless present state , anxiety Canadians about of and among
 an anxiety our medicare Canadians Nonetheless system the increasing present future there and of among , the . about state
Citizens worry about whether they will have access to the highest possible quality of health care when they need it. 
 care whether of need possible worry to will it Citizens . they health have about they when the quality access highest
 it access they the to of highest possible care Citizens worry whether quality they about when . will have need health
 worry highest when whether need possible they have access will about it . the health of to they quality care Citizens
 they . of health worry highest care quality have need access to the possible Citizens when they will it about whether
 have of need they they possible care the to quality access when about . health it will worry highest whether Citizens
 . have worry need possible when health of highest Citizens quality the access about they care to they whether it will
 care the of whether to they health worry possible they it quality . highest Citizens access have about when will need
 they about . of will possible when whether care the quality it Citizens have they to highest worry access health need
 it of about Citizens care to worry highest health they access when will they possible whether have . quality need the
 . whether they Citizens quality have of possible when worry need they it will health care about highest the access to
 have health will . quality Citizens possible worry they care need when whether the it they about to access of highest
 highest quality of worry have possible need Citizens whether to the about access they they when care it will health .
 they care of have they quality to the possible when about it access . need highest health will whether Citizens worry
 . of Citizens worry to have need the quality whether they access about health care highest it when they possible will
 highest quality the about will of they have possible care . it they access worry whether need Citizens to health when
 health access quality when they they worry highest of will the have care . whether to need Citizens it about possible
Senator Bolduc :
It has not very much accountability to the Canadian public. 
This has been discussed many times in Quebec City and last year, for the first time, they appeared before a parliamentary committee. 
This is a serious matter.  
Senator Grafstein :
Honourable senators, I do not question the issue of accountability. 
The problem is whether one would be able to obtain the very best people by the public process, the newspaper process or the media process, or whether the accountability process is better when governments, which are indirectly accountable, make those appointments and those nominated are then accountable to a parliamentary committee.  
Senator Bolduc :
When you talk about "accountability," I would suggest that that is second best. 
It is not a perfect situation, although you will have a parliamentary committee taking some responsibility. 
It is better than nothing but, in my opinion, it is second best.  
I am fairly sure that, in one way, the pure accountability we are talking about is quasi-impossible. 
Have different people manage different funds so that we will have some evaluation, some comparison and some diversification.  
Hon. Michael A. Meighen :
Honourable senators, this is precisely where I wanted clarification. 
Are you recommending that the fund be divided into four $25-billion portions and that so many firms administer each $25-billion portion in its entirety? 
Or are you recommending that one firm be responsible for one sector, such as the real estate sector and another firm be responsible for another sector?  
Senator Bolduc :
Honourable senators, in my opinion, it could be by sector, but my preference would be for the total to be broken down into four portions covering a variety of investments. 
Otherwise, if you have a block of $25 or $30 billion in real estate, you know what that means. 
 Citizens worry about whether they will have access to highest possible quality of health care when they need it .
 to possible will need have when access highest of they care health the whether it quality worry . Citizens they
 Citizens when have care they the access to it quality about they . health will highest need of whether worry
 they they when of it . have will highest care about need whether the worry access health quality to possible
The anxiety arises from a number of sources, including the pace and extent of restructuring that has gone on in recent years.  
 a of that gone the sources , on of The years number in restructuring and from recent arises . including extent anxiety pace has
 sources of recent of that , and on the anxiety gone pace number years . in from has The arises restructuring a including extent
 recent on restructuring The in has and including a years from of of , the pace . arises sources number extent anxiety gone that
 restructuring has extent pace years of on that gone The and the arises recent in from . a of number including sources anxiety ,
 including restructuring arises . a in The number from gone on of sources , that of extent years pace anxiety the recent has and
 , in and years has pace arises of number gone . the restructuring anxiety The from of that a sources including extent on recent
 of gone has arises sources and restructuring the a , The including anxiety number years in of from recent . pace that extent on
 that gone number pace years . of arises in sources restructuring has of on extent The anxiety including a recent , the from and
 extent on , anxiety sources that from of the pace restructuring recent arises has in . number gone years and of The a including
 of sources in and from of that a anxiety years recent , arises restructuring on the including pace number has gone extent . The
 recent pace in , The of and from years has a arises of on . number that gone the sources anxiety including restructuring extent
 of the , number gone anxiety restructuring including and on recent has that sources of in years arises extent a The from . pace
 on extent gone including pace years number from the arises has a , restructuring of . recent and sources The of in that anxiety
 years number pace extent anxiety arises a , restructuring sources recent including . on that The and the of of in gone from has
 , pace extent gone arises years The of anxiety a number recent and including the from restructuring sources that . has of on in
 including restructuring a from recent extent pace in that , and sources of years . has The the number arises anxiety of gone on
Senator Tkachuk :
Then they had the gall to limit their breeding, thus causing a situation whereby, 15 years from now, there will be fewer people working to pay for the people who turn 65 at that time. 
They limited their breeding. 
From what we know of social behaviour during the 1970s, abstinence was not the order of the day. 
People were, shall I say, "fuddling". 
It was not their fault; it was the fault of scientists. 
The cause, they say, was social behaviour. 
That is what caused the end of this pension plan. 
It is one other social plan gone astray. 
The good old days are gone.  
We have another problem. 
People live longer. 
Again, science has interfered with a social plan. 
Retiring at age 65, dropping dead three to six years later, depending on your gender, was good for governments. 
At its inception in 1965 - payments started on January 1, 1967 - in order to be eligible for CPP benefits, you had to be 68, and 68 was about the same year that the average male died. 
It was the perfect pension plan:
Pay all your lives, and then die just as the first cheque is put into the mail. 
If there was a postal strike, the government had the benefit of both worlds - the pensioner was dead and the cheque was in the mail.  
From the beginning, the CPP was simple, but it was misnamed. 
It was misnamed because it is also a life insurance program. 
 The anxiety arises from a number of sources , including the pace and extent of that has gone on in recent years .
 of including restructuring a , The in years the and of sources pace arises gone recent from anxiety number on . that has
 arises has including recent extent in sources pace a of from and anxiety gone of the on years . that , number restructuring
 including , anxiety that restructuring extent years pace arises number recent gone of of the and from sources in a . has The
The federal government recognizes that this restructuring has been difficult for Canadians and, therefore, it will increase health care funding to the provinces from previously budgeted levels. 
 budgeted government health increase The funding from will the Canadians to , this levels it federal and difficult recognizes been that previously has . restructuring therefore provinces , for care
 from , provinces this that federal budgeted previously levels has the health been difficult restructuring . , to will Canadians The therefore funding government recognizes it care and for increase
 will budgeted the . increase this and has difficult provinces , funding that to Canadians , been health for federal recognizes levels care therefore government it The restructuring from previously
 this federal funding budgeted , The has restructuring the been increase therefore from will previously , government it difficult to for and care Canadians recognizes health that provinces . levels
 this been previously funding . The the Canadians therefore will increase , budgeted provinces and from government to , federal has recognizes that care difficult health restructuring it levels for
 Canadians health funding this will recognizes for that the previously restructuring . budgeted care difficult , government therefore federal from and provinces been , increase The has it levels to
 , provinces been it budgeted Canadians care The the that from recognizes this government health difficult , has will to and . federal funding for levels increase restructuring previously therefore
 this difficult for the that . has care and Canadians budgeted The , funding been government health from federal recognizes , increase it will previously provinces restructuring levels to therefore
 from provinces this government levels recognizes , funding and health been that increase will Canadians to , federal it difficult previously has care therefore The for the restructuring . budgeted
 . and to from , , will it has budgeted Canadians the health The for provinces restructuring this funding therefore care levels increase difficult previously federal government that recognizes been
 . , health to this increase from budgeted The , Canadians previously funding for therefore care has it recognizes that difficult restructuring government been will provinces federal the and levels
 difficult and for from , will funding increase provinces budgeted , government been care has therefore it restructuring federal Canadians previously levels recognizes the health that . this The to
 therefore this has provinces funding budgeted levels federal restructuring that recognizes for , care previously government and Canadians it been . to , will increase difficult from health The the
 will funding the increase Canadians therefore it that . for care difficult , recognizes has from levels and The been previously budgeted this restructuring , to provinces federal health government
 for it that care health from this provinces The and recognizes has will , previously funding been federal the Canadians levels government difficult therefore budgeted restructuring to , . increase
 , the increase it that therefore and provinces for this from previously recognizes government restructuring funding , federal difficult levels health Canadians care been has . The to will budgeted
There may be evidence in other places, and there may be views held by other people, but I had the evidence before the committee. 
I would not say it was totally unequivocal, but it was clear enough to satisfy me that there was a high enough hurdle having been passed to support the federal resolution. 
That is what I have said in my speech. 
Read the evidence. 
Read the transcript. 
It is clear.  
Senator Bolduc :
Honourable senators, I have listened to your arguments attentively. 
You have argued your case like good lawyers. 
There is no doubt about that. 
What you said basically is that it is up to Quebec to address its education problem and decide whether there will be guarantees of denominational education in the schools. 
You say it is a provincial problem. 
In my speech, I have said that there is no guarantee whatsoever that that is what will happen. 
But the right to dissentience that was guaranteed under section 93 of the Constitution will no longer be protected. 
The opinion of the Parti Québécois on this is known, and that is why it is a bit awkward.  
Senator Grafstein :
There are two parts to my honourable friend's question.  
I say, "Yes."  
Once we pass this amendment, it will be for the province of Quebec and those in the Province of Quebec to decide their educational architecture.  
I should like the province of Alberta to do things the way we do them in Ontario. 
 The federal recognizes that this restructuring has been difficult for Canadians and , therefore , it will increase health care funding to the provinces from previously budgeted levels .
 restructuring levels funding it increase . The federal , will previously recognizes provinces budgeted has therefore difficult the this health Canadians to for government been , care and that
 for levels Canadians provinces this . it government previously to therefore budgeted federal difficult recognizes care will been , from increase funding restructuring that The health and has ,
 Canadians federal . increase therefore provinces the for , care and health it to difficult funding recognizes has that restructuring this been levels , will budgeted government The previously
It will introduce legislation to increase to $12.5 billion a year the guaranteed annual cash payments to provinces and territories under the Canada Health and Social Transfer.  
 increase provinces the 5 the a Transfer and legislation Canada guaranteed under Social billion payments cash . to year annual to territories introduce Health 12 $ to and will It .
 . increase to to It . annual year 12 introduce Health a the and to Canada and the guaranteed payments 5 billion territories under will Social cash $ provinces Transfer legislation
 the billion Health territories payments to and guaranteed to legislation . Social a year Canada will 5 the 12 and introduce Transfer increase . cash $ provinces It under to annual
 year provinces under payments Social 12 . annual will to increase the billion cash Health 5 to territories $ a legislation guaranteed the Canada Transfer It and to . and introduce
 to 12 to introduce $ payments Transfer increase territories under . 5 It annual to the will Canada and the provinces Health billion cash a year Social legislation guaranteed . and
 Canada legislation to guaranteed cash and a . billion introduce $ territories 12 5 annual Transfer provinces Health will It under to the . increase year the to Social and payments
 cash billion . 5 year Health under the It increase annual . to guaranteed and a will to introduce provinces legislation territories payments to the Canada Social and 12 $ Transfer
 legislation 12 to 5 payments and . and guaranteed Social introduce under It Health cash billion provinces Transfer increase annual $ to the . a to year territories the will Canada
 under the Social cash year will to provinces increase legislation introduce annual billion Canada Health to 5 12 and $ the . It and to guaranteed Transfer . territories a payments
 the Social and guaranteed introduce will increase . $ to . cash provinces territories year under the payments and It Canada annual to to Health 12 legislation a billion 5 Transfer
 year Health territories Social a and legislation provinces payments the . to 12 introduce annual and guaranteed . the It Transfer $ to increase under 5 billion to cash Canada will
 territories legislation $ and the to 12 to provinces annual billion the . year to guaranteed payments 5 cash It will under and increase . introduce Social a Health Canada Transfer
 under provinces a Transfer billion year Canada payments introduce to the will . territories Health to cash and Social . legislation guaranteed annual the and increase 12 It $ to 5
 guaranteed payments year the under territories $ 5 and increase to provinces a billion will It 12 Transfer annual Canada cash and to Health the . introduce legislation . to Social
 will cash to under year increase to the Transfer payments Social . 12 territories and $ and introduce the Health Canada . It to guaranteed 5 a billion annual provinces legislation
 payments billion to legislation annual and territories provinces to increase Health $ will Canada and Transfer 12 guaranteed . . It to Social 5 the under introduce a the year cash
Therefore, I will ask Senator Bolduc.  
This involves a question that I asked Senator Kirby yesterday. 
It is a question of accountability. 
In theory, it is possible that this fund will become larger than the entire budget of the federal government in the years to come. 
Yet we are placing it in the hands of 12 people.  
Does the Honourable Senator Bolduc concur, as Senator Kirby did, that there should be some scrutiny by Senate and House of Commons committees whereby these 12 people who will be sitting on this board will be under a certain amount of scrutiny before they are placed in this lofty, powerful, very responsible position?  
Senator Bolduc :
Honourable senators, that is a very good question. 
There is one thing in the bill that is very acceptable. 
The Auditor General will be able to look at the management of the Investment Board.  
As a result, there will be some accountability in the form of an audit. 
According to Mr. Massé's report, there are 85 to 90 different government organizations. 
This is all very interesting, but none of them will have as much money as the one we are talking about. 
We are talking about an annual amount on the order of 15 per cent to 20 per cent of Canada's gross national product. 
It is an enormous amount. 
I therefore think there has to be some sort of accountability, and one of the ways to achieve that is for parliamentarians to be involved in drafting the Auditor General's report; in my view, there should be an amendment along these lines, to guarantee that that is the case.  
Hon. Jerahmiel S. Grafstein :
Honourable senators, I have a brief question for Senator Bolduc. 
I believe the Caisse de Dépôt is the most powerful pension fund in Canada. 
What accountability does that fund have to the Canadian public?  
 It will introduce legislation to increase to $ 12 . 5 billion year the guaranteed annual cash payments to provinces and territories under the Canada Health and Social Transfer .
 to provinces billion . payments Social legislation Canada under $ the will annual year territories the and guaranteed 12 and cash a to Transfer 5 Health . It to increase
 will to increase billion payments introduce . the and territories 12 cash guaranteed annual and Transfer $ . legislation Canada to Social provinces to year 5 under a Health It
 legislation under the the 12 Social guaranteed to cash introduce . and to Canada and to provinces 5 payments Transfer $ a billion annual . It year Health territories will
One of our goals as a country must be to continue providing all our citizens with access to the highest possible quality of health care and the other tools they will need to enjoy healthy lives as we move into the 21st century. 
 as of possible lives to and move be 21st the our we as to the care into they tools the One . continue with need other citizens to access health enjoy will quality highest providing must all a century healthy country of our goals
 must highest country quality as our need all other healthy of care access we citizens with be as health they our 21st enjoy providing possible will move lives to . continue to of the the the One a and goals century tools to into
 move of the health we will of our 21st into as goals to must with citizens lives quality to be care other they need country the highest . a One tools to enjoy healthy century all and access possible our providing continue as the
 need continue a be our to healthy with providing must lives to they access One tools as . the other goals into highest quality of to move we and the of citizens century health country the as will 21st enjoy care possible all our
 the access and possible all care as healthy country the be our they as to move other to must . need will lives providing 21st continue we into health tools goals highest enjoy quality with of of century citizens the a to our One
 as country care citizens access health to highest possible and the the they we enjoy move as . our must into will of healthy other century with goals our lives 21st all be providing continue a need to the quality of One to tools
 must access goals of a need our of country tools they be and One we to possible with our other will citizens as the healthy health all . enjoy lives into the care continue to quality as to move century providing 21st the highest
 as . move a health with of the lives goals providing enjoy access citizens to to will our we the continue our other One tools and the to as of possible highest into all need 21st care must they be century quality country healthy
 with and of of quality tools to other must care need the to the enjoy will the possible citizens as to highest goals health move country our One providing continue healthy our century we as a be 21st they all lives access . into
 access enjoy providing our as into all they to country as must . of with the 21st be the health to a tools highest the quality our lives we of healthy to possible care One will century and need continue move other citizens goals
 other . of quality as and into citizens lives enjoy One care health healthy to highest goals the country of our must need move possible they with tools providing the as access continue century all be will we a to the to 21st our
 our to to 21st lives enjoy One healthy continue the move highest a century tools . must other the as we and to of access need possible with goals country all they as of care health into the our citizens providing quality be will
 as must highest enjoy to healthy the move of to will quality as the continue century we country need the One 21st tools goals they with providing citizens be lives possible . all our and health other a of care into access our to
 move healthy of country they our care and to all be the possible One with continue tools citizens health goals of providing the enjoy highest our a access as into as must to other need the century we . quality to will lives 21st
 with health possible tools care our a healthy all our be as need will country and quality we the enjoy goals other must of access . continue citizens as to of to providing they 21st lives to into move century One the highest the
 providing . the into of possible other the and enjoy as tools 21st goals they move the century be our quality of all highest need to must as healthy access citizens health our continue will a country One with to lives care we to
I would be happy to investigate the reasons why those particular numbers appear in the manner in which she has presented them.  
Senator DeWare :
I appreciate that. 
It will not matter that we are less able to raise money than the so-called "have provinces."  
Honourable senators, because the population of the Atlantic provinces is not growing as fast as Ontario, Alberta or British Columbia, the smaller provinces will get less cash while the larger ones will get more. 
The $12.5 billion figure is prorated by provincial population.  
Will the government consider the way it calculates transfer payments to ensure that cash transfers to Atlantic Canada, Saskatchewan and Manitoba do not decline any further?  
Senator Graham :
I shall certainly bring those very legitimate concerns to the attention of the responsible minister.  
Environment 
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Support by Provinces of Government Position taken at Kyoto-Request for Particulars 
Hon. Mira Spivak :
Honourable senators, on December 1, the federal government proposed that Canada's position at the Kyoto meeting on global climate change would be that developed countries should target 2010 emissions that are 3 per cent below 1990 levels and that Canada should reach the 1990 levels by 2007.  
Given the consultation process preceding Kyoto, could the Leader of the Government tell us which provinces and territories support the position that the federal government is currently advancing in Kyoto, and could he also tell us which ones do not support this position?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, if I were in Kyoto I would be able to offer Senator Spivak a more definitive answer. 
I know that the Province of Alberta is well represented in Kyoto, as the Honourable Senator Ghitter has alluded to in the past.  
I do not know the positions of the individual provinces. 
Certainly there was an enormous amount of consultation at meetings in various parts of the country prior to the Kyoto conference.  
The meetings of officials have proceeded for several days. 
 One of our goals as a country must be to continue providing all our citizens with access to the highest possible of health care and the other tools they will need to enjoy healthy lives as we move into the 21st century .
 with our access our enjoy a to they healthy other must of citizens lives of tools care all be country . health to 21st the to highest move goals into need continue as and the century providing the quality we as possible will
 as will health care of be to One we as highest all 21st the continue our century must the other with tools of into they healthy . move our providing the to to citizens access and need quality lives goals country possible a
 care other a healthy goals they our to as lives the providing as highest be our of move century health will access with of One we need tools citizens country into to the to 21st all quality continue and the possible must .
Canadians have a right to expect their governments to work together in harmony to better meet the shared goals and desires of Canadians for a better health system.  
 together have expect meet Canadians goals to a the and right in to of harmony system better to work . desires for health shared their a better governments Canadians
 goals a a to shared Canadians to in desires their Canadians system to better meet health harmony governments right of have better work expect . and together the for
 Canadians work shared their goals of meet a governments to harmony desires the a right system Canadians better to in health have . better and for together to expect
 expect work harmony for . in governments right the have Canadians system to a shared and desires to of to better their better a meet Canadians health together goals
 a to meet and desires Canadians of to expect the together goals harmony for health . to shared governments have Canadians in their better a system better right work
 a their expect to the health goals right a to shared have meet of . governments together to and harmony Canadians better better for system work Canadians desires in
 better health have shared goals to to meet expect a their Canadians better right and work together to system desires harmony the Canadians for a of . governments in
 . governments to better Canadians shared in harmony to their right work system a better of health desires expect Canadians meet to together for a the have goals and
 their better goals to expect have the governments shared better desires harmony Canadians system together to a in . of to right health and work meet a Canadians for
 better . work a have in together system to shared to goals expect their and Canadians harmony health to better the of desires Canadians for a right governments meet
 expect for goals and of together a harmony work health Canadians . desires better the to a better system meet shared right have their to to in governments Canadians
 of governments health better a expect to to together in a for goals better the right their and harmony Canadians . Canadians work shared have meet system to desires
 harmony governments meet goals and to for a expect work . to Canadians better their the of shared together better a right Canadians have in desires to system health
 desires Canadians right . to of their meet better better for a work governments Canadians goals a shared in expect and to health have system harmony the to together
 right and of to goals meet system . better Canadians a health have the a shared for to their harmony in to work better expect desires Canadians together governments
 governments Canadians the . Canadians work to better have system right harmony of to in a together meet and their goals a desires expect better for health shared to
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, before I call Orders of the Day, I wish to remind honourable senators that we will be taking the official photograph of the Senate tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
Canada Pension Plan Investment Board Bill 
Second Reading-Debate Continued 
On the Order: 
Resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Kirby, seconded by the Honourable Senator Joyal, P.C., for the second reading of Bill C-2, to establish the Canada Pension Plan Investment Board and to amend the Canada Pension Plan and the Old Age Security Act and to make consequential amendments to other Acts.  
Hon. David Tkachuk :
However, there are a number of important issues that we believe are relevant and important not only to this side of the house but to all senators. 
Some senators, including me, are interested in this bill from a personal point of view as well. 
This bill was brought in last week so that we could work on it. 
Now, we must complete that work and pass the bill by Christmas. 
I do not think that we are handmaidens. 
We do not have to take orders. 
We must do what is right.  
This bill has important consequences for many of us, and more particularly, for our children and our grandchildren. 
Those people who are already retired and at the age of 65 will receive all their benefits. 
For those people who are in the middle and who will soon be retiring, it is not a big problem for them. 
They will have some reduced benefits and some increased costs. 
To those people who have been paying all their lives - that is, all the baby boomers who will begin to turn 50 - they will receive benefits and be faced with another 15 years of increased costs.  
 Canadians have a right to expect their governments to work together in harmony to better meet the shared goals and desires of Canadians for a health system .
 better a have governments system desires meet expect Canadians and a better for of right . together work their shared to Canadians to health to in goals the
 together system better their . Canadians meet better goals work to a desires shared for governments in to right expect Canadians have health harmony to the a of
 goals and to a their Canadians harmony work the together governments better Canadians to shared have right in better a for expect desires to of . system meet
The Government is firmly committed to a publicly administered, comprehensive health care system that provides universal access to high quality care for Canadians anywhere in the country.  
 . publicly health is , to care access the country universal a quality system Government administered provides care to in comprehensive firmly high that committed Canadians anywhere The for
 in country Canadians access system provides that administered Government comprehensive universal quality firmly The anywhere care care , . for to health high the committed to a publicly is
 publicly a The high access in committed to universal administered care comprehensive Government for provides the firmly is quality country system care Canadians that anywhere . to , health
 administered high system quality , health is in comprehensive The a to the country . universal publicly care care firmly Government access for Canadians anywhere committed to provides that
 Canadians is access publicly comprehensive care health the system , for that to care provides country quality The to firmly universal high anywhere in administered . a Government committed
 health to the is a that provides universal access Canadians for publicly comprehensive care , anywhere country The to quality . firmly system care in administered committed high Government
 the care that country universal is to access administered publicly system high health . to care committed quality for Government provides Canadians a , in firmly The anywhere comprehensive
 , comprehensive high anywhere health care to The that is a country provides access quality care universal the . in administered publicly to Government firmly system committed Canadians for
 is high system firmly committed anywhere a , to that access country provides Canadians the universal The . for care quality comprehensive publicly administered care Government to in health
 health access high administered comprehensive quality Canadians firmly provides anywhere The the care that a to for universal country , care to is committed in system publicly Government .
 a the provides is to that quality health Canadians , access for country universal Government firmly administered care in anywhere publicly committed comprehensive high The to care system .
 access care administered quality the for anywhere The is , that universal committed system high publicly . health comprehensive firmly a provides Canadians country to to Government care in
 administered the care provides system for that committed a firmly high to The is , comprehensive . in publicly to quality anywhere country universal care access health Government Canadians
 country , a system in comprehensive to health high care anywhere that the Canadians universal committed access quality is to administered care for . firmly publicly Government provides The
 administered health access anywhere care comprehensive is quality that committed the in care , country Canadians system . to a high The publicly universal Government for to firmly provides
 publicly The , anywhere committed is health country comprehensive system care to care the access that provides quality . a in universal Government high Canadians for administered firmly to
Hon. William M. Kelly :
Honourable senators, I give notice: 
That on Thursday next, December 11, 1997, I will call the attention of the Senate to the way in which the Senate conducts its business.  
QUESTION PERIOD 
Federal-Provincial Relations 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Province of Quebec-Request for Particulars 
Hon. Fernand Roberge :
Honourable senators, my question follows the announcement made yesterday regarding the government's decision to set at $12.5 billion the cash floor for transfer payments made under the Canada health and social transfer (CHST). 
The government would have us believe that this amount represents an increase in health care payments. 
However, the figures indicate otherwise.  
The following year, in 1999-2000, they will only be $3.748 billion. 
Yet, the government claimed yesterday that it was implementing a stable transfer system. 
In fact, cash payments paid to Quebec for health and education will be reduced by over $300 million over a five-year period. 
Honourable senators, I remind you that these cuts are in addition to this year's reduction of $700 million compared to last year. 
Could the minister make inquiries and inform the Senate of the reasons why, in spite of a cash floor set at $12.5 billion, Quebec's share will diminish by $307 million over the next five years?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
The federal government cut its own spending earlier, more drastically and in greater measure than transfers to the provinces. 
The government has made it clear that it will use increased fiscal flexibility to make strategic investments in priority areas, and action was taken early and directly on that commitment based on favourable fiscal results that emerged this past spring.  
With respect to individual provinces, I do not have those numbers. 
However, I would be happy to provide them for my honourable friend.  
 The Government is firmly committed to a publicly administered , comprehensive care system that provides universal access to high quality care for Canadians anywhere in the country .
 quality for health publicly provides universal The care a anywhere Government system high is administered firmly country in to committed access , comprehensive care . that Canadians the
 to universal health is a publicly Government Canadians care anywhere access , system the The that firmly provides country care comprehensive . for quality to administered high committed
 anywhere care firmly is universal Canadians to committed health to administered The . provides that a access high the Government care for , quality system in country publicly
The Government has a leadership role in preserving and enhancing medicare. 
 leadership in . Government medicare has and The a preserving enhancing role
 enhancing Government in has leadership and . The medicare preserving a role
 preserving . and a Government medicare in role leadership enhancing The has
 has The leadership and role preserving in a . enhancing Government medicare
 and role in a preserving medicare leadership Government . has enhancing The
 enhancing a preserving . leadership medicare The in has Government role and
 . a Government preserving has enhancing The and leadership medicare in role
 The preserving enhancing and has role a medicare . Government leadership in
 has and in enhancing role leadership Government . preserving a medicare The
 role preserving has in a leadership and Government enhancing medicare The .
 leadership role . medicare and The preserving enhancing a in has Government
 Government has preserving leadership The medicare . role a enhancing in and
 enhancing leadership Government . a and in role The has medicare preserving
 medicare enhancing in a role preserving leadership Government has The . and
 in . Government role The and preserving leadership a has medicare enhancing
 role leadership enhancing and a medicare in Government . preserving has The
I received a response yesterday to my question, and I wish to read it into the record. 
This concerns employment insurance and the reserve. 
It states: 
A reserve is necessary, since it makes it possible to apply more stable premium rates throughout the economic cycle, thus making it possible to avoid increasing them in a recessionary period. 
In addition, the reserve makes it possible to ensure there are sufficient funds to pay benefits when they are most necessary.  
What happened in the last recession was a $2 billion surplus in the Employment Insurance Account turned into a $6 billion deficit in two years, and it was necessary to increase premiums by 30% at what was already a difficult time for job creation. 
Consequently, the government believes that it is wise to establish a reserve in the Employment Insurance Account.  
I am assuming that since you have given me this response, that was indeed the strategy on the part of the government.  
I then went on to say: 
If I may, I will quote from The Financial Post of today, November 26, a 1997. 
An editorial entitled "EI surplus is a deficit-reduction tax" states clearly that the EI will result: 
...in an accumulated surplus suspected to top a scandalous $19 billion by the end of 1998. 
If you need $8 billion to look after a recession, using the last recession as the example, what kind of recession are you planning on?  
That is to say, what kind of recession are they planning on in the future with a reserve of $18 billion?  
Provincial finance ministers met in Ottawa. 
I think last night they had dinner with Finance Minister Paul Martin. 
In an article in The Globe and Mail yesterday, it was stated: 
With Ontario's Ernie Eves and B.C.'s Andrew Petter leading the charge, the provincial ministers have made it clear that they consider Mr. Martin's recent $1.4 billion cut to unemployment insurance premiums insufficient...  
The premiers have insisted that they have some input into Ottawa's budget-making and how it allocates the surplus among new spending, tax cuts and debt repayment.  
In a telephone interview on Friday, Mr. Petter said the NDP government in British Columbia wants Ottawa to offset a dramatic increase in Canada Pension Plan premiums with reductions in UI premiums.  
 The Government has a leadership in preserving and enhancing medicare .
 preserving a enhancing role medicare and has The in Government .
 medicare and preserving . The leadership role in a Government has
 role in a has Government medicare enhancing . and The preserving
It has a constructive role to play as a partner with provinces and other interested parties. 
 It interested with a partner and as has parties a constructive . to provinces role play other
 and provinces with It to role as . a partner interested play parties other constructive has a
 has a with and role parties . to It interested partner provinces play other constructive a as
 with to constructive parties other role provinces as partner and play has interested . a It a
 role provinces It constructive parties and other has a . as to a partner interested with play
 parties interested . as has other and role play provinces with constructive It to a a partner
 other parties a as interested play provinces to has partner and with It . role constructive a
 play partner parties role a other a provinces . with and has interested constructive It as to
 partner parties with play It constructive to a interested and as has role provinces other a .
 has with other partner constructive to as provinces and It . play parties interested a role a
 partner a with play other has parties to as interested constructive provinces . role a and It
 has provinces partner play interested a with as to and a role parties . other constructive It
 interested other constructive and with partner as to a play . a It provinces role parties has
 with parties other role a has provinces partner to as interested and constructive It . a play
 to as role constructive play parties other provinces has and interested a partner with a It .
 to parties It a other interested . constructive role partner provinces as with a play has and
I am still attempting to obtain clarification for him on this matter as soon as possible.  
Detention Facilities for Refugee Claimants-Request for Particulars 
Hon. Donald H. Oliver :
As the honourable leader knows, the Department of Immigration maintains detention facilities across the country. 
Can he tell us how many refugee claimants are presently in detention, the number of centres, and the annual cost to Canadians to maintain these centres?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Fisheries and Oceans 
Negotiations on Multilateral Agreement on Investment-Continuation of Limit on Foreign Ownership of Commercial Licences-Government Position 
Hon. Gérald J. Comeau :
Honourable senators, my question to the Leader of the Government in the Senate is in regard to the Multilateral Agreement on Investment. 
One of the fundamental objectives of the MAI is to treat non-resident investors as if they were domestic investors; what is called the national treatment principle. 
The government assures us that attempts will be made to protect our culture, but the government has also been very vague on the other important sectors of our economy.  
Would the minister, therefore, advise this house whether our negotiators will seek to continue the 49-per-cent foreign ownership limit on commercial fishing licences in Canada?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, I am not sure what is the present position. 
I presume that my honourable friend is correct in his assumption, but I will have the matter clarified.  
Senator Comeau :
I might advise the minister that indeed there is a 49-per-cent limit on foreign ownership of licences. 
Unfortunately, almost nothing has been said by the negotiators as to how they will handle these extremely important issues that impact on all the coastal communities of Canada.  
As a supplementary, would the minister also advise whether the government negotiators have been consulting with the fishing industry on this subject? 
 It has a constructive role to play as partner with provinces and other interested parties .
 play parties interested role provinces a constructive has to a with It and as other .
 and . as provinces a other interested a parties constructive partner to role with It play
 provinces and . interested as a It parties to other constructive play partner role has a
The Government will play that role in a spirit of openness, pragmatism and innovation. 
 . will The pragmatism innovation Government play spirit a openness , that in and of role
 pragmatism openness role Government . innovation of , that a and play in The will spirit
 and in . Government will The innovation of pragmatism openness role , spirit that a play
 , innovation will and play pragmatism in role that a The spirit of openness . Government
 in play , innovation . The role will and of openness that a spirit pragmatism Government
 will Government a role of play spirit . in openness , innovation The pragmatism that and
 a innovation The Government will that role play . and , spirit in openness of pragmatism
 play The will openness pragmatism spirit a innovation , . that in role of and Government
 pragmatism play The that a in of openness will innovation , role Government spirit . and
 spirit play in a will pragmatism innovation . , Government and that of The role openness
 openness play pragmatism that innovation . The Government will , of role in spirit and a
 role of Government will spirit in pragmatism , a openness and play . innovation that The
 a pragmatism openness Government innovation role that , The will spirit of and play in .
 play spirit in will openness pragmatism , that innovation and a Government role of . The
 spirit role openness will a The , innovation Government that and in of play . pragmatism
 pragmatism and innovation a openness Government spirit , in role of The will . that play
We conclude that there is almost no chance of meeting this goal in Canada under any reasonable economic scenario...  
And I stress this last part: 
...given current commitments to action.  
Could the Leader of the Government tell us if the relevant ministers are aware of this study, whether there have been any responses, or what the reaction has been to this prestigious firm's study?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
It provides very important data. 
I am not sure the government would necessarily agree with the findings of the study but, certainly, those findings will be taken into consideration.  
Senator Spivak :
I am glad to hear that.  
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Concept of Differing Targets-Government Position 
Hon. Mira Spivak :
In the current discussions in Kyoto, the idea of tailoring reductions targets to individual countries' economic and social profiles rather than having a one-size-fits-all commitment has gained some currency, particularly in view of the most recent American proposal. 
Where does the Canadian delegation stand with respect to this concept?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government):
Honourable senators, the media is reporting, of course, on a possible deal on targets and time-tables which could see Canada accepting a reduction of 5 per cent from 1990 levels bythe year 2010. 
At this point, these reports are speculative, but negotiations are ongoing.  
National Unity 
Recent Remarks of Prime Minister-Possible Conditions of Secession of Quebec-Government Position 
Hon. Pierre Claude Nolin :
Honourable senators, I would like to return to the matter of the Prime Minister's statement last weekend on Quebec's secession. 
 The Government will play that role in a spirit of openness , pragmatism and .
 Government spirit that will , and innovation role play openness The a of pragmatism .
 in a will . and of that openness Government spirit play , The innovation pragmatism
 The , in innovation spirit will and a openness that pragmatism play Government . role
There are steps that we can and will take to lead the efforts by all governments.  
 we the can will take to . and efforts governments that by are steps There lead all
 we can are and . to by There governments lead will take efforts all steps the that
 are the efforts lead . can we all that will steps and take There by governments to
 are we . to governments take that will can and efforts all steps the lead There by
 the all we . take are to will There steps efforts lead governments and can by that
 all that efforts steps by we and can will . governments take are the There to lead
 will we take are governments and that can lead to efforts by the There steps all .
 by all we governments There and to steps . that the can efforts lead will are take
 will and governments . steps we the are by take to efforts can There lead that all
 the by efforts . all that and lead will to we can governments steps are take There
 that lead take governments efforts can to and by There . are steps the will all we
 take we . can lead the that will all by There governments and to are steps efforts
 lead . There by efforts will take governments we that the can are all and to steps
 and lead the . take we will by efforts There are steps to governments all can that
 are by the that to . governments take will steps efforts lead There we can all and
 can are take will . to lead There that all governments and steps efforts the we by
Honourable senators, before I call for Senators' Statements, I should like to introduce the two pages who are with us this week through the exchange program with the House of Commons.  
They are Anne McCulluch of Calgary, Alberta, who is pursuing studies in journalism at Carleton University.  
Kirk Nangreaves of Saint-Hubert, Quebec, is studying at the University of Ottawa Arts Faculty.  
He is majoring in psychology.  
On behalf of all senators and the Senate, I bid you welcome.  
SENATORS' STATEMENTS 
The Senate 
Response to Newspaper Article on Senator's Residency Qualifications 
Hon. Colin Kenny :
Honourable senators, I rise today on behalf of a colleague who cannot be present, Senator Paul Lucier. 
Senator Lucier has sent me a fax which he has asked me to communicate to the chamber. 
For your benefit, he wants me to reply to the comments made about him in the media recently.  
He writes: 
I would like to make some points with respect to this matter: 
The Citizen said: "Paul Lucier said the Senate's legal staff approved his change in residency five years ago when he moved to Vancouver."  
Senator Lucier says: 
This is not true. 
I never spoke with legal staff five years ago about this. 
I never had any problem about residency.  
2. The Citizen said: "He said Senate staff told him he could keep his seat as long as he continues to own property in the Yukon."  
 There are that we can and will take to lead the efforts by all governments .
 lead the steps There that are to . and efforts all we take by can will
 to . will efforts and by steps take all lead we that can are the There
 . we that to by take the can governments all steps are efforts lead will and
Preparing Canada for the 21st century means ensuring the medicare system meets the needs of the future. 
 the of . means Canada the meets future system century ensuring 21st the Preparing for medicare the needs
 the means 21st Canada needs the . system the future the meets medicare ensuring of century for Preparing
 future 21st the ensuring system medicare meets the . of Preparing needs the century means the for Canada
 needs means the meets Preparing future Canada medicare system century the of the ensuring the for 21st .
 medicare means ensuring needs 21st Preparing century Canada the of . the the future meets for system the
 the meets means Preparing the for the medicare system the 21st Canada future ensuring . of needs century
 the means Preparing century ensuring 21st meets medicare the needs future system for Canada the . the of
 the means meets ensuring for future 21st . of Preparing the system needs medicare the the century Canada
 ensuring the means medicare . the of century system meets Canada Preparing 21st needs future the for the
 means of the Preparing future for ensuring . 21st the the needs century meets Canada medicare the system
 the system ensuring medicare Preparing the needs 21st century meets Canada for means future the . of the
 system century medicare the the of the 21st . the Canada Preparing means ensuring needs future meets for
 needs the ensuring future meets 21st Canada Preparing of system century means the medicare the . for the
 system needs future the the . of the meets for ensuring means Preparing the medicare Canada 21st century
 ensuring Canada century needs the Preparing system future meets means the medicare 21st of the . for the
 medicare means Canada . system the ensuring 21st of for the century the future the meets needs Preparing
But it is the private sector. 
What you are doing with this bill is giving enormous powers to a few people with money belonging to all Canadians, particularly the poor. 
It is serious because we do not know how long this will last. 
Bills at second reading are always good measures. 
I saw more than my share in 40 years. 
Ministers come up with their legislation and they promise miracles. 
Three years later we take stock and discover that things are not like they were supposed to be. 
The minister's comments do not have nearly the same impact after three years.  
I am not saying everything is managed perfectly in the private sector, but I will tell you that it is the people's own money. 
It is not public money. 
No one is forced to invest in Royal Trust.  
Senator Gigantès :
The public is made up of individuals. 
These individuals are private persons. 
Under the proposed system, they would invest in something which may not make huge profits, but which will not experience the disasters of the private sector.  
Senator Bolduc :
It is a matter of choice. 
Senator Gigantès :
With a system such as the one proposed, one thing is for sure. 
There will be no Trevor Eyton to squander the money, there will be no Conrad Black or Olympia & York to take it away from you.  
 Preparing Canada for the 21st century means ensuring the system meets the needs of the future .
 century needs ensuring of Preparing 21st means the future Canada . for the meets the the system
 meets future needs Preparing for the 21st medicare Canada means the the century system . the ensuring
 the means century . medicare the the ensuring future Preparing of system meets Canada the for needs
It means responding to emerging issues in health care. 
 to It emerging care means issues in health . responding
 It health . responding issues to in means emerging care
 responding to It . means care emerging issues in health
 in issues means It emerging health . responding care to
 issues health means . in care It emerging to responding
 in health to responding . emerging means It issues care
 responding issues in to . care It means health emerging
 issues means It responding . in emerging care to health
 care in health to responding issues . emerging It means
 It responding issues in emerging health . care means to
 in emerging means to . responding care health issues It
 means health care issues responding to . emerging It in
 responding . health It to means emerging issues in care
 . health care emerging issues means to It responding in
 . health issues emerging care in responding It means to
 emerging health to It care . responding in means issues
As Senator Cools pointed out, no statute was broken. 
Therefore, the federal requirement that all federal laws must comply with the Charter of Rights and Freedoms was not affected.  
Yesterday, Senator Beaudoin was explaining the different parts of the Constitution, the British North America Act of 1867, the Charter of Rights, and so on. 
At times, it appears the Supreme Court of Canada considers that the Constitution consists only of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 
Despite all the evidence - the stolen truck, the blood on the accused - the judges were only interested in one thing, and that was the arrest warrant. 
There was no warrant because the police acted on the spot when they had the accused, and I think they acted quite properly.  
Honourable senators, the Supreme Court ignored the rights of Mr. Boyle. 
Section 7 of the Charter indicates that Mr. Boyle had the right to life, privacy and security of the person, and those rights were not to be taken from him except by and in accordance with the principles of fundamental justice.  
I think the justices of the Supreme Court of Canada should be sent a message reminding them that the victim also had rights under the Charter.  
In all fairness, honourable senators, I must say that three of the justices dissented with the majority decision. 
They felt the police action had no bearing or outcome on the decision. 
The chief justice came down the middle and quoted the decision made by former chief justice Brian Dickson, which I understand finds that, if the subject is not spelled out in the Constitution, it is implied as being there. 
However, there again, that is merely my interpretation.  
I emphasize again that Mr. Boyle had the right to his life. 
He had the right to have a vehicle and operate it, and he had the right to have money in his possession. 
All those were taken away from him, and all the Supreme Court of Canada could think of was that piece of paper called a "warrant" and to criticize the police for not having such a document.  
I wanted to suggest that perhaps criminals should apply for a warrant before they commit murder, but I do not want to pursue that because I am afraid that some Charter judge will give them a warrant or a licence to do so. 
Fifteen years ago, I would have been shocked at criticism of a decision rendered by the Supreme Court; but, today that is commonplace. 
When a major decision comes down from the Supreme Court, the media is there to interview people who wish to comment, mostly negatively, on the decision. 
As I stated, we would not have seen a headline like that 15 years ago.  
 It means responding to emerging issues in health care
 responding It care . health in issues to emerging
 issues to health in . means care responding It
 emerging It means in health issues . care responding
Working with its partners, the Government will undertake the following initiatives: 
 : Government partners initiatives its , Working with the the undertake following will
 : the its undertake initiatives partners will Working Government the following , with
 following Working , the initiatives undertake will the with Government partners its :
 partners with undertake Government will following initiatives , the Working : the its
 partners the following initiatives : its will the Government undertake Working , with
 undertake partners following the Government the with , will Working : its initiatives
 the initiatives following with partners Working , Government its undertake will : the
 : the partners Working undertake initiatives with the its will Government following ,
 , the the initiatives will : Government its Working partners undertake with following
 following Government the Working will , the initiatives with partners its undertake :
 , following undertake will with : Government the the its Working partners initiatives
 partners the the with undertake , Working initiatives Government following : will its
 , will the partners following : Working with Government initiatives its undertake the
 initiatives partners following : , the the with undertake Government will its Working
 the partners initiatives , will Government undertake Working : its with the following
 will Government its undertake , the Working the with following initiatives : partners
Fat chance when it comes to education! 
Honourable senators, I think we have fulfilled our constitutional responsibilities if each senator is individually satisfied that a reasonable test of the majority of the minorities has been achieved. 
Under the evidence presented to us - not outside the room, but before us - that was clear. 
In that respect, I support the report and the resolution.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
It was moved by the Honourable Senator Pépin, seconded by the Honourable Senator Lucier, that this report be adopted.  
Is it your pleasure, honourable senators, to adopt the motion?  
Motion agreed to and report adopted, on division.  
Quebec 
Linguistic School Boards-Motion to Amend Section 93 of Constitution-Debate Adjourned 
Hon. Fernand Robichaud , for Senator Graham, rose pursuant to notice of Thursday, October 2, 1997: 
Whereas the Government of Quebec has indicated that it intends to establish French and English linguistic school boards in Quebec; 
and whereas the National Assembly of Quebec has passed a resolution authorizing an amendment to the Constitution of Canada; 
and whereas the National Assembly of Quebec has reaffirmed the established rights of the English-speaking community of Quebec, specifically the right, in accordance with the law of Quebec, of members of that community to have their children receive their instruction in English language educational facilities that are under the management and control of that community and are financed through public funds; 
and whereas section 23 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms guarantees to citizens throughout Canada rights to minority language instruction and minority language educational facilities under the management and control of linguistic minorities and provided out of public funds; 
and whereas section 43 of the Constitution Act, 1982 provides that an amendment to the Constitution of Canada may be made by proclamation issued by the Governor General under the Great Seal of Canada where so authorized by resolutions of the Senate and House of Commons and of the legislative assembly of each province to which the amendment applies; 
now therefore the Senate resolves that an amendment to the Constitution of Canada be authorized to be made by proclamation issued by His Excellency the Governor General under the Great Seal of Canada in accordance with the schedule hereto.  
SCHEDULE 
AMENDMENT TO THE CONSTITUTION OF CANADA 
CONSTITUTION ACT, 1867 
 with its partners , the Government will undertake the following initiatives :
 its will initiatives undertake with partners : , the the Government following
 with Government partners initiatives following , : the will the undertake its
 following Working : partners undertake the , initiatives its Government with will
It will take measures to support Canadians in responding to the expanding needs for home care and community care.  
 for measures to care the It responding to take in care will expanding home needs community and . Canadians support
 Canadians support for community take . care and to expanding to needs home care will measures It responding the in
 home responding to will It measures for . support care in to Canadians and care take the community expanding needs
 It will to expanding care . responding care measures support home the for and needs community take Canadians in to
 support to for responding . Canadians needs care It measures to take and in will care expanding home community the
 to Canadians home It for . to expanding will care responding needs and care support the take community measures in
 support It care the for home . will expanding community in measures responding take care to and to Canadians needs
 Canadians care to care community to take expanding measures in . the It for and needs home support will responding
 needs take in It care the and for measures support will . community Canadians to care expanding to home responding
 measures expanding care It for to needs care in responding Canadians community and home to the . will support take
 home will It take Canadians community responding in expanding needs care to measures for support care and the . to
 It take Canadians measures support care community responding in care to expanding . needs to and the will home for
 It and . responding care will home in measures expanding to to take support community Canadians for the care needs
 for needs expanding It care responding the and take to support in care measures . home Canadians community to will
 in the home responding expanding It Canadians for take needs will care . care to measures to support and community
 care . home to measures the in expanding care will to community Canadians take needs responding support for It and
Senator Gigantès :
Are you quoting the Reform Party?  
Senator Tkachuk :
I do not think so, although I have a few things to say about Reform here too, which I will get to right away.  
I would like to quote Preston Manning's comments from Tuesday, October 28, in committee. 
These are the other guys in the other place. 
He was speaking of Martin and Pettigrew.  
The alternative we would like the committee to consider rests on four pillars rather than three: the seniors benefit, which is targeted to lower-income people; a smaller, more focused CPP, not a scrapped CPP; 
There is the big change from the last election.  
...an expanded RRSP program; and tax relief to seniors. 
We will argue that our four-pillar plan delivers more retirement income per dollar invested than this three-pillar plan the government is putting forward.  
I think I have explained some of the ideas we got from the government side. 
The liability of $600 billion becomes unfunded if we all quit paying CPP premiums, but the obligations still have to be met. 
That is what Reform was proposing through the election campaign and over the previous four years. 
They have changed. 
Now they want a smaller CPP.  
However, Preston Manning could never explain the first program. 
Now they have a CPP program which they wanted to explain to the minister in committee. 
Well, they could not get it together. 
Preston Manning, who made a promise to do it before committee meetings ended in the other place, failed to do it. 
 It will take measures to support Canadians in responding to the expanding needs for home and community care .
 responding in for and will It the care home . to take Canadians care community expanding to measures support
 It and expanding will in . to needs take care responding Canadians measures support for the to home community
 home expanding support and care in measures care responding community needs the Canadians to take to for It .
It will develop a national plan, timetable and a fiscal framework for providing Canadians with better access to medically necessary drugs.  
 will . national framework medically It with timetable a develop access for Canadians necessary drugs fiscal and plan to providing a , better
 timetable better a will access plan drugs a national with framework It and fiscal providing develop , Canadians necessary medically for to .
 medically necessary for providing access better drugs , It with timetable national plan will framework . Canadians to a a develop fiscal and
 a framework Canadians for better . fiscal It plan to drugs and medically a providing will timetable , access with develop necessary national
 with necessary timetable Canadians and . drugs plan to develop better for access It framework a fiscal providing , medically a will national
 plan better a framework for It and Canadians a to necessary national providing . develop fiscal with will drugs , access medically timetable
 . for necessary access will plan better timetable a Canadians framework fiscal providing drugs a It develop , to and medically with national
 . a , to timetable develop plan and necessary Canadians access a framework providing drugs with national for It will medically fiscal better
 Canadians better national with , will plan It access fiscal a a framework and for develop medically to . timetable drugs necessary providing
 Canadians and necessary drugs a , better providing national to access It fiscal . timetable medically develop will a for with plan framework
 fiscal framework providing a national , access a It . plan with timetable and drugs necessary for medically develop to better Canadians will
 a drugs medically plan national with will providing , Canadians and fiscal develop access necessary a to timetable for framework . better It
 , better medically and Canadians to with develop . plan necessary for access fiscal a drugs framework providing a timetable national It will
 timetable It necessary medically and framework Canadians access . a develop will for a fiscal better plan providing with , drugs to national
 with better drugs , It a medically Canadians framework to for develop plan a necessary providing and timetable national access fiscal . will
 timetable framework a It with better . providing will necessary for develop a access to national medically , and Canadians plan fiscal drugs
It will be up to parents to decide whether publicly funded denominational education should be maintained indefinitely. 
The fact that the notwithstanding clause was used by the Government of Quebec to protect the existing education legislation seems to indicate, however, that the government reacted favourably to the wish expressed by some parents to maintain Protestant and Catholic denominational schools. 
We have every reason to believe that the place of religion in public education will be subject to a full, open and democratic debate and that the parents' choice will continue to prevail, as it has for so long outside Montreal and Quebec City.  
Throughout the debate that took place before the special joint committee and in this House, we considered the fact that subsection 23(1) of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms does not apply to Quebec and the issue of whether the amendment to section 93 would prejudice the educational rights of native Quebecers. 
Section 23 of the Charter and section 93 of the Constitution Act of 1867 concern educational rights and, instinctively, we might think they are closely linked. 
However, they are not constitutionally related and, in any case it seems entirely ill-advised to reduce consent for constitutional change to a mere transaction where one right serves as a bargaining chip for the improvement of another.  
Honourable senators, I strongly urge you to support this resolution. 
Although we noted there was a consensus to amend section 93, we felt the real issue was the quality of the education of children in Quebec, and on that point opinion was unanimous.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Senator Robichaud, allow me to correct an impression that you left and to ask you a question. 
However, I wanted to make this correction, because you referred to the "government in place", when in fact it was the Liberal government of the day that made the decision, over the objections of the Parti Québécois then in opposition.  
I am asking you the same question I asked Senator Grafstein, but to which I did not get an answer. 
Why is it so important to exempt Quebec from section 93 to allow it to reform its school system? 
What is the connection between the two?  
Senator Robichaud :
Let me give you my version of the facts. 
When we heard witnesses from Quebec, including school board officials, parents and teachers, some of them told us that, in its present form, section 93 brings about a superimposition of structures, particularly in the Montreal region. 
These people told us that this was preventing authorities from providing the best possible services. 
These people also told us they wanted the resolution to be passed before the end of the year so they could start long-term planning. 
They would really appreciate having some time to implement these changes.  
 It will develop a national plan , timetable and a fiscal framework for providing Canadians with better access to medically necessary .
 plan a to better and framework develop drugs a , for . fiscal access providing medically timetable Canadians with national It necessary
 and providing better drugs national framework develop . a a with It , plan access medically will to necessary Canadians for timetable
 a timetable better providing a access and for will , drugs plan It to with . Canadians medically develop fiscal framework national
It will improve the quality and effectiveness of health services across Canada by establishing the Health Transition Fund to help the provincial governments innovate in the areas of primary care and provide more integration in the delivery of health services, home care and pharmacare.  
 to provide health in in innovate governments areas establishing pharmacare help the care provincial , of improve care Transition the by Health It . services primary home more integration delivery of Canada effectiveness and of the quality the services will and across the and health Fund
 care provincial improve health It Canada effectiveness services governments areas services and establishing the more integration innovate the across pharmacare the and quality and , in of Fund of . Health of Transition health home the by to in will care primary delivery the help provide
 provincial home and care the primary in Transition Fund in Canada improve quality , care provide the It the health by services of integration more to of the and governments and the areas establishing of innovate pharmacare health effectiveness delivery across . services will Health help
 and in home care improve establishing to provide Fund pharmacare health the more will , of effectiveness innovate . the by the of delivery and the Transition help Canada areas primary quality across the health care integration and governments provincial of in services services Health It
 It areas services more in Transition to , care integration by the pharmacare provide and home Canada services and establishing will and improve of help innovate of quality of Health Fund health health across primary the delivery the care . the in governments effectiveness the provincial
 the Health pharmacare the , care provincial the integration services of quality services to . establishing will It and the home care innovate Fund in health the in help of provide governments areas and across effectiveness Transition of and by delivery improve more primary health Canada
 Transition provincial and help in of It the , the by services care provide Health quality will the Canada Fund home governments effectiveness and integration areas to pharmacare the across more improve in health innovate establishing the delivery of . services health primary of care and
 the innovate provincial delivery in effectiveness and areas , to of . primary care services of the Health It home integration more Fund establishing by the help Transition the the care provide health Canada services will and and pharmacare in governments across health of quality improve
 delivery the improve the innovate Canada in will in Health of services provincial to primary the the quality home provide areas integration and effectiveness establishing . more health care Fund across , by pharmacare the and health of of It governments Transition help and care services
 Transition provincial home effectiveness care and quality innovate more the by help pharmacare Health governments services delivery integration of in provide care services Fund Canada the the , . improve in the of health health and establishing to areas the It and across primary of will
 the quality the of to improve help care areas Transition Health provide innovate the care establishing the delivery health and effectiveness by the . across pharmacare governments of It of services home primary , in health Canada Fund integration will and more and provincial in services
 Transition to in primary establishing across in integration health improve will , the help of and quality innovate and governments It provincial the services areas more pharmacare Health care the effectiveness Fund care Canada health provide . services the by of home and the delivery of
 health of in quality areas delivery pharmacare across care by to the health . services the help primary of integration Transition and and effectiveness of provide more services and care home establishing Health It the governments Fund , in provincial the improve the innovate Canada will
 of care quality improve more effectiveness and help . the pharmacare of and in provincial the Canada and home the will across by to , It primary of governments care Transition establishing provide delivery in services Fund the areas health health services the innovate Health integration
 across the of care Transition Canada , of provide and by will governments the care Fund the pharmacare Health improve services the It of areas health . establishing to provincial primary in effectiveness help in and and the health more quality innovate integration home delivery services
 home the by of innovate integration Health effectiveness pharmacare more to provide establishing Fund Transition services improve primary health care the governments provincial It areas the help care quality , delivery in the will services of . the across Canada and in and and of health
Immigration 
Tracking and Detention of Unsuccessful Refugee Claimants-Government Position 
Hon. Donald H. Oliver :
Honourable senators, my question to the Leader of the Government in the Senate is a continuation of the line of questions I had for the honourable leader yesterday. 
Will the Leader of the Government tell this chamber what plans are being considered to detain those who are dangerous, or who are judged to be unlikely to depart of their own free will? 
Where will they be detained, and under what controls to ensure that Canadians are protected?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, I take my honourable friend's question seriously, as I did the questions he put yesterday. 
I am still attempting to obtain clarification for him on this matter as soon as possible.  
Detention Facilities for Refugee Claimants-Request for Particulars 
Hon. Donald H. Oliver :
As the honourable leader knows, the Department of Immigration maintains detention facilities across the country. 
Can he tell us how many refugee claimants are presently in detention, the number of centres, and the annual cost to Canadians to maintain these centres?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Fisheries and Oceans 
Negotiations on Multilateral Agreement on Investment-Continuation of Limit on Foreign Ownership of Commercial Licences-Government Position 
Hon. Gérald J. Comeau :
Honourable senators, my question to the Leader of the Government in the Senate is in regard to the Multilateral Agreement on Investment. 
One of the fundamental objectives of the MAI is to treat non-resident investors as if they were domestic investors; what is called the national treatment principle. 
The government assures us that attempts will be made to protect our culture, but the government has also been very vague on the other important sectors of our economy.  
 It will improve quality and effectiveness of health services across Canada by establishing the Health Transition Fund to help the provincial governments innovate in the areas of primary care and provide more integration in the delivery of health services , home care and pharmacare .
 services in primary areas integration effectiveness , provide Transition in across the pharmacare the governments provincial improve of establishing innovate . by health and Health Fund the and and It care care delivery help to health services will of home quality the more of the
 the help in of services services of the and It innovate the Fund primary in pharmacare , will to Health Canada across care . of the and effectiveness Transition and quality integration areas delivery home the health establishing health improve care provide provincial by governments
 of improve health home the of in services Health pharmacare provincial . care the the provide and in integration to quality care services will more health governments establishing by the effectiveness Transition Canada help the Fund primary of and delivery across It , areas innovate
Canadians recognize that good health depends on much more than medical care. 
 Canadians medical much than . that care recognize on depends health more good
 that health . depends care on recognize than much good Canadians more medical
 care Canadians on that health depends than much good recognize more medical .
 more recognize Canadians much on depends care . medical that health good than
 good care depends on Canadians . than more medical recognize health that much
 recognize than . good on Canadians care much more health that depends medical
 that depends good Canadians than recognize much care . medical on more health
 on medical depends health that Canadians than much care more . good recognize
 health on medical much Canadians good more care that . recognize than depends
 . health Canadians than that good care recognize much depends on more medical
 on good much that than recognize depends more care Canadians . medical health
 on more depends good medical much care health that Canadians recognize than .
 good . care than depends recognize more health much on Canadians medical that
 much on recognize that . health medical care Canadians good more depends than
 . than good much depends recognize Canadians that care medical more on health
 medical recognize good on more much that health Canadians depends than . care
At the time of the 1966 social contract with Canadians, the Liberals were in power. 
They entered into a social contract with their citizens. 
It was they who did it. 
"We will take your money and provide you with a pension," they said. 
As soon as they got their grubby hands on the cash, it was lent to the provinces at favourable interest rates. 
They were cheating Canadians who trusted that when they got old, they would have a pension. 
Baby boomers, who have paid all their working lives since the program's inception, now have the audacity to reach 50. 
We have had the audacity to reach 50!  
Senator Cools :
Not me.  
Senator Tkachuk :
Then they had the gall to limit their breeding, thus causing a situation whereby, 15 years from now, there will be fewer people working to pay for the people who turn 65 at that time. 
They limited their breeding. 
From what we know of social behaviour during the 1970s, abstinence was not the order of the day. 
People were, shall I say, "fuddling". 
It was not their fault; it was the fault of scientists. 
The cause, they say, was social behaviour. 
That is what caused the end of this pension plan. 
It is one other social plan gone astray. 
The good old days are gone.  
 Canadians recognize that good depends on much more than medical care .
 depends Canadians health good than medical care . on that more recognize
 care health recognize medical depends than that on good much . more
 that care Canadians recognize health on much than good more medical depends
Our social and economic situations also help to determine the quality of our health. 
 also help quality and . economic the situations of our to determine health Our social
 and our determine social Our health help of to situations . the economic also quality
 the also of help to determine . economic health our and situations social Our quality
 determine help and to quality . also economic the of health social our situations Our
 determine health help social of and situations . quality Our also our to economic the
 Our and our . to of situations also economic quality the help determine health social
 the situations health also determine of our to . Our economic social and help quality
 . situations quality health economic social Our of determine and help to our also the
 to economic determine health help our the situations and Our also of . quality social
 health quality our . also social economic of the determine help to and situations Our
 and help of also determine social situations to Our quality economic health . our the
 social and economic situations also our of the to quality . help health Our determine
 social determine health and Our the economic quality our of to situations . also help
 our situations health economic also . help of to determine the and social quality Our
 health also Our our help the social and . of quality situations economic to determine
 health Our the of . and situations determine our economic to also social help quality
These are the two groups to which Senator Bolduc referred.  
There were certain spokespersons representing these groups. 
They were French-speaking Protestants and a smaller group of English-speaking Roman Catholics. 
The Catholics were represented by English-speaking priests.  
Again, in Senator Bolduc's thoughtful speech, he refers to these groups. 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, I regret to interrupt once again. 
The clock now says six o'clock.  
Senator Carstairs :
There is agreement that we will not see the clock, Your Honour.  
Senator Grafstein :
It is not clear to me whether these witnesses represented the entire spectrum of the groups for whom they spoke. 
Having said that, their rights are of concern.  
However, it is clear that denominational teaching will continue inside the province of Quebec by Quebec law.  
It is difficult to see how their accessibility to denominational teaching in the public school system will be abrogated in the short run. 
Obviously, it is no small solace, unlike the case for many years in the province of Ontario, that minority denominational rights, religious education, was achieved, in part, through public funding in the province of Quebec. In other words, as Senator Lavoie-Roux pointed out, in the province of Ontario there is and was no public funding of other religious or denominational schools, unlike Ontario. 
I want to make specific reference to this point because I have some personal experience in this regard. 
Access to public funding in Quebec for denominational education remains available in Quebec. 
I find it hard to believe how the Province of Quebec in the future, even if the notwithstanding clauses are removed, would not continue to fund denominational training. 
Whether it is through a charter school, a public school system, or through a publicly funded private school system, denominational training to all groups, in my view, will continue in the province of Quebec for the foreseeable future.  
 social and economic situations also help to determine the quality of our health .
 of quality social situations . Our also and to help economic determine health the
 determine the economic also our . situations and help quality to health social of
 to determine economic . and help health of quality also situations Our the our
As a country, we must increase our efforts to promote healthy lives. 
 a . our healthy we increase must efforts promote As lives country to ,
 a efforts . healthy to , we increase our country As lives promote must
 a healthy As promote to , country . lives we increase efforts must our
 efforts country . our must , healthy we increase lives As to a promote
 country a , healthy . we our efforts promote As increase lives to must
 to increase promote we our lives a , As healthy country . efforts must
 healthy , a we . lives our promote must efforts country increase As to
 healthy As country must , . our increase promote to lives we a efforts
 increase As healthy efforts must , lives our promote . country we a to
 lives must As a to we promote efforts increase our , country . healthy
 . must country As , to efforts promote increase we healthy our a lives
 we As , efforts promote a . country lives our must healthy increase to
 As country lives promote must increase we . , efforts our a to healthy
 our , a increase to As promote must . country efforts we lives healthy
 . must healthy promote to lives country efforts a , our increase we As
 , . lives efforts a country increase must we healthy As our to promote
Again, it was clear to me that the only way that the federal government could accede to the Quebec assembly's request was by utilizing the 1982 Constitution. 
The Government of Quebec knew this. 
We in Parliament knew this. 
Hence, I and others on the committee insisted that Quebec representatives be invited, despite reports we read in the press to the contrary, that the Quebec representatives would not attend at Ottawa.  
Finally, representatives of the Government of Quebec were invited to attend, which they did, together with members of the opposition. 
They appeared before the committee so that this point and other questions could be addressed.  
Members of the committee were pleased when the Minister of Education, Madame Marois, and the Minister of Federal-Provincial Affairs, Mr. Brassard, accepted our invitation to appear.  
Minister Brassard repeated the well-worn, often-repeated, proposition that no Quebec government will feel bound to recognize the 1982 Constitution. 
Minister Brassard then acknowledged, almost in the same breath, that under the law of the land, under the Supreme Court of Canada, the Province of Quebec was indeed bound by the Constitution Act, 1982. 
This is now clear and unequivocal.  
Clearly and fairly, the Province of Quebec deems itself bound by the 1982 Constitution. 
On the testimony received and based on my personal review, I concluded that the federal government indeed had the power under the 1982 Constitution, section 43, to accede to Quebec's request.  
That Parliament should or would exercise such power was obviously a much more difficult question. 
We recognize, under our Constitution, the nature of the exclusivity of this aspect of education under the Constitution as a provincial matter. 
This question, in pith and substance, is a matter of provincial education within the powers of the Province of Quebec. 
Then, honourable senators, came the more complicated problem alluded to by Senators Wood, Pitfield, Bolduc, Lavoie-Roux and Kirby and Lynch-Staunton, namely, how to determine whether or not, as defenders of the Constitution, we in the Senate could satisfy ourselves that there was a majority of the so-called "minorities" affected by any proposed diminution of their rights or privileges. 
All senators agree that one of our paramount duties in the Senate is to safeguard the Constitution and the rights of the minorities under that Constitution.  
I shall now turn to the essence of section 93, which is called by some commentators, a "Pocket Bill of Rights." 
That is a misnomer.  
In essence, section 93 is a series of privileges rather than full rights. 
 As a country , we must increase our efforts to promote lives .
 efforts . we to , must our lives healthy a promote country As
 our promote efforts healthy As . must a increase to country lives we
 healthy As country we our , to increase promote lives a . must
The Government will contribute to this goal with an agenda to promote good health. 
 health agenda goal an Government contribute to good this . with promote The will to
 an goal this with to . Government agenda will health to good promote The contribute
 Government agenda to will goal an promote The with . contribute this good to health
 to with agenda good promote health this The goal . contribute Government an to will
 health agenda an promote good contribute goal with . to this to Government will The
 Government good promote . will agenda to health goal contribute this The an with to
 with contribute this will good health an goal agenda The to to promote Government .
 with an good The this promote health to will Government to goal contribute . agenda
 agenda health Government an . contribute promote this to goal with The good to will
 will good an . The with goal contribute agenda to Government promote to health this
 health contribute with will promote The an Government . to good agenda this goal to
 . agenda to will to promote contribute this an Government good goal with health The
 to will this with Government good goal health agenda promote an contribute The . to
 promote contribute will goal good this with health Government The an to . to agenda
 . with this an health Government good to to promote contribute The agenda goal will
 this will goal Government agenda to promote health contribute with good to The . an
- which is the Quebec Education Act passed in June - 
- upholds the principle of freedom of choice in schooling. 
However, the debates of the Joint Committee of the House of Commons and Senate highlighted the fact that the legislation in this area will be jeopardized the moment Quebec is excluded from the application of subsections 1 to 4 of section 93. 
The Committee therefore believes that the amendment could turn out to be something of a time bomb unless the Quebec government is prepared to renew the notwithstanding clauses or look for a better alternative that would allow it to retain in practical terms its authority to enact legislation on denominational schools....  
Finally: 
The Catholic Committee therefore strongly urges the Government of Quebec to immediately find a legal provision, constitutional or otherwise, that would allow it to strike a balance between the requirements of the Charters, including the requirements of section 41 of the Quebec Charter, and the legitimate expectations expressed by the public. 
Such a provision would rid the government of the dilemma described above concerning the use or elimination of the notwithstanding clauses. 
More importantly, it would allow a genuine democratic debate over a new social pact in the area of religious education.  
Given their authorship, I think we have to reflect seriously on these thoughts.  
Before we finally vote, honourable senators, I trust that when the resolution itself is before us we can go into Committee of the Whole to hear any witness who was not heard by the joint committee and whose reflections will guide us. 
In particular, I refer to the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs who, after all, is the sponsor of this resolution on behalf of the Government of Canada. 
He is as well placed as anyone to reply to concerns expressed here and elsewhere. 
I would expect that he would welcome the opportunity to do so before a vote is taken.  
I feel strongly that the minister must share his views with this house and engage in an open and frank exchange directly with its members. 
I urge the leadership on the other side to arrange such a meeting at the earliest opportunity.  
There are still too many unanswered questions and disturbing uncertainties for many senators on both sides of this house to state a firm position at this time. 
The minister should be able to provide assurance, the lack of which so far has caused many of us here to remain hesitant to support this resolution, myself included.  
Hon. Jerahmiel S. Grafstein :
Honourable senators, education is everyone's business. 
When citizens debate their children's education, sometimes passion overwhelms reason.  
 The Government will contribute to this goal with an agenda to promote good health
 promote Government agenda goal this will health good with an The to contribute to
 to health Government will this to good . promote goal The an agenda with
 good Government promote . with to to The health goal an agenda contribute will
Emphasis will also be placed on those factors that determine the health of a country's population, including the equality of economic and social opportunity for all citizens.  
 those and citizens , for on be ' health including also . population of that equality social economic factors determine of s the a the Emphasis all opportunity placed will country
 will be opportunity . social all those also for the country placed Emphasis health citizens including of , a and factors population determine on ' equality that s of economic the
 population economic of factors s Emphasis and a country that will . including for , citizens ' on placed those be equality all the also opportunity social the health of determine
 , on those ' including also determine and opportunity the population a country the equality for will of citizens Emphasis all that of social health economic s placed be factors .
 on opportunity citizens health those s the be a the that all , social factors Emphasis of placed determine equality and also ' country of . including population for economic will
 will the s be of and health those equality social , ' for that the citizens placed determine all factors on of opportunity economic also Emphasis . including a country population
 Emphasis the the placed health citizens a country on all economic ' and s of of factors , equality opportunity be for including population will social determine also those . that
 country ' s also including the social citizens placed all of population , for . that a factors economic the and equality determine of health will Emphasis opportunity on those be
 will of the placed . Emphasis on be factors for equality of citizens country opportunity population ' determine economic s also and a that those , the health all social including
 , will and ' opportunity social equality on s of health determine population country that a Emphasis . those of also the for economic including be citizens all placed factors the
 . those citizens and be for factors of , economic equality country the on determine Emphasis population opportunity also including will health that of social all placed s ' a the
 that placed of s on and factors population including citizens a the , will for equality determine social ' country all those . opportunity economic health Emphasis be of the also
 that country s those determine ' citizens equality a be Emphasis will factors population economic the for of on , including and the of social also opportunity health all placed .
 including s on the that citizens determine all social Emphasis of those and for will ' also the factors health economic a placed country population opportunity be of equality , .
 health citizens s the also of the those be all factors a for ' will placed opportunity equality Emphasis and of population on including . social economic , that determine country
 , also of will country of equality s population opportunity . including be for that factors ' economic the all health on determine social those and citizens Emphasis placed a the
Resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Kirby, seconded by the Honourable Senator Joyal, P.C., for the second reading of Bill C-2, to establish the Canada Pension Plan Investment Board and to amend the Canada Pension Plan and the Old Age Security Act and to make consequential amendments to other Acts.  
Hon. David Tkachuk :
However, there are a number of important issues that we believe are relevant and important not only to this side of the house but to all senators. 
Some senators, including me, are interested in this bill from a personal point of view as well. 
This bill was brought in last week so that we could work on it. 
Now, we must complete that work and pass the bill by Christmas. 
I do not think that we are handmaidens. 
We do not have to take orders. 
We must do what is right.  
This bill has important consequences for many of us, and more particularly, for our children and our grandchildren. 
Those people who are already retired and at the age of 65 will receive all their benefits. 
For those people who are in the middle and who will soon be retiring, it is not a big problem for them. 
They will have some reduced benefits and some increased costs. 
To those people who have been paying all their lives - that is, all the baby boomers who will begin to turn 50 - they will receive benefits and be faced with another 15 years of increased costs.  
I will tell you for whom this is important. 
I have a daughter who is 24 and a son who is 21. 
Many of you have children and grandchildren. 
The government is asking them to pay 9.9 per cent - I am sure it is 9.9 per cent because the minister wanted the number to be under the figure 10. That represents 10 per cent of their income, and it will increase with inflation. 
The $35,000 that they pay on today will inevitably be more tomorrow.  
As inflation eats away at it and the numbers rise, that number remains the same. 
 Emphasis will also be on those factors that determine the health of a country ' s population , including the equality of economic and social opportunity for all citizens .
 will citizens economic of and those social . , including health also for the a country be determine opportunity on that all of Emphasis equality the placed ' s population
 be including on determine that those of health opportunity equality will for a ' Emphasis all social the also country of . placed population economic the factors , citizens s
 ' will factors the of on a all citizens population for including and placed also be social country equality opportunity those , determine Emphasis the economic . that s of
Some of the most urgent health problems today are found in Aboriginal communities. 
 Aboriginal health urgent are communities of problems the today . found Some in most
 . are found most of problems Aboriginal Some communities today urgent in health the
 today urgent Some most of . communities Aboriginal are the in problems health found
 problems found health . of in the communities most today Some urgent are Aboriginal
 . in health urgent Aboriginal Some problems are found communities today of the most
 Some in most Aboriginal problems . are urgent today health the of found communities
 problems Aboriginal the today urgent Some are health communities of in most . found
 problems found communities health of Aboriginal today most the . Some urgent are in
 communities in most of are today Some urgent the found problems . Aboriginal health
 problems the communities today urgent Some most found of are in health Aboriginal .
 . of in today problems Aboriginal the most Some communities are health found urgent
 . urgent the found most communities Some problems Aboriginal health in of are today
 most of . found health communities are in Aboriginal today problems urgent the Some
 health Aboriginal problems most in are the communities of found today urgent Some .
 . urgent in Aboriginal health are communities most problems Some of found the today
 Some . in found problems are Aboriginal most today of communities health urgent the
That is why they have an agreement today. 
We tried to get it done in 1986.  
Senator Gigantès :
And you failed. 
You could not do it.  
Senator Tkachuk :
Because the Liberals would not agree. 
I will defend my government, and my honourable friend will defend his.  
I will not delve too far into the OAS because there are other speakers who wish to deal with this issue over the next two weeks. 
Perhaps we, as senators, will be able to discuss this matter well into the new year, which I hope we do.  
Senator Gigantès :
You are reading from the wrong script.  
Senator Taylor :
It is obvious that my honourable friend does not have any notes.  
Senator Tkachuk :
I think I am getting to honourable senators opposite.  
I was told by the Honourable Senator Kirby that members opposite would only have one speaker on this issue. 
I have a feeling that we may hear from a few more senators after I and other senators point out some of the weaknesses in Bill C-2.  
Honourable senators, I would reiterate that this is not a pension program: this is a payroll tax! 
In the past, it harboured cheap loans for provinces, and it will harbour a $100-billion fund that will grow to a $1-trillion fund. 
 Some of the most urgent health problems today found in Aboriginal communities .
 communities found Some in . today health of the are problems Aboriginal urgent
 the problems Aboriginal today found communities of Some in most urgent . health
 . communities urgent problems today health are the in Some most of found
The Government will work with other partners and Aboriginal communities to: 
 : partners and Aboriginal communities other Government The to will with work
 to with other Government partners and communities The : will Aboriginal work
 with and : work other Aboriginal The will to Government communities partners
 other : work and will with Government communities The Aboriginal to partners
 other partners with and Aboriginal will communities to Government : The work
 partners The communities Government work other : and with Aboriginal will to
 partners work will communities : The Government to with other Aboriginal and
 other partners : and with to work The Aboriginal communities Government will
 communities will work The : Aboriginal Government partners to with and other
 : Government to other communities with work and will Aboriginal partners The
 The Government will : communities work and partners with other Aboriginal to
 will Aboriginal with communities work The Government partners other and to :
 : Government with other work and Aboriginal to The will communities partners
 Government communities with other The partners and Aboriginal work will : to
 work other communities and : Aboriginal will with Government to The partners
 and Aboriginal with other Government work will communities partners The : to
The $35,000 that they pay on today will inevitably be more tomorrow.  
As inflation eats away at it and the numbers rise, that number remains the same. 
This goes against everything we have ever done on this program since its inception in 1966. 
It stays the same. 
In 10 or 15 years, that $3,500 will be worth $1,500, $1,000, $500, depending on what government does and what happens to inflation.  
Senator Taylor :
Elect the Liberals and it will be high!  
Senator Tkachuk :
If we elect the Liberals, inflation will be high? 
We already know that! 
Let me continue in that vein. 
Perhaps honourable senators opposite do not want to hear what Paul Martin will be doing, and the explaining that you will have to do back home in 10 or 15 years when your children ask you what you did about this bill. 
When they retire, their CPP benefits will be worth about what they put in, plus 2.5 per cent.  
I do not get it. 
I do not understand why we are being asked to do that to our children, so that those who are retiring today can receive full benefits and those who are retiring soon can get their benefits. 
I do not get it. 
I will try to explain it today, and - I hope I can convince you.  
The CPP is part of a larger program that Paul Martin is introducing. 
Everything involves reform. 
We will have a reform of the Old Age Security benefit, which is coming up after Christmas. 
 Government will work with other partners and Aboriginal communities to :
 partners with other Government and to communities work : will The
 and The partners to : work other Government with Aboriginal will
 to will with The work communities partners other Aboriginal and :
develop new initiatives to address the rapid increase in tuberculosis and diabetes in Aboriginal communities; and 
 increase rapid and ; the to develop tuberculosis diabetes in initiatives in address new Aboriginal and communities
 the Aboriginal in to develop address and communities new and initiatives rapid ; increase tuberculosis diabetes in
 Aboriginal tuberculosis ; to develop new in the initiatives address communities increase and in and diabetes rapid
 develop the communities ; increase Aboriginal in rapid new and address initiatives in and tuberculosis diabetes to
 address ; communities to Aboriginal the new increase and in initiatives tuberculosis in and rapid diabetes develop
 and initiatives tuberculosis to rapid the develop increase diabetes in communities ; Aboriginal and address in new
 develop address and to tuberculosis initiatives communities diabetes in increase and new Aboriginal in ; the rapid
 the new in ; increase rapid develop to tuberculosis address diabetes and communities initiatives in and Aboriginal
 diabetes and tuberculosis develop the address ; new initiatives communities to and Aboriginal rapid increase in in
 initiatives address ; and the develop in increase to rapid tuberculosis Aboriginal and diabetes new communities in
 tuberculosis in the and communities and initiatives ; in increase to develop address rapid Aboriginal diabetes new
 new initiatives address and ; rapid tuberculosis the in and diabetes develop communities Aboriginal to increase in
 diabetes to and develop new increase communities in address initiatives the tuberculosis and in ; rapid Aboriginal
 in to in initiatives and address and ; diabetes rapid develop tuberculosis new the communities increase Aboriginal
 diabetes new develop in in and tuberculosis to and ; Aboriginal rapid the initiatives address increase communities
 in diabetes increase Aboriginal new and initiatives to address rapid in and develop ; tuberculosis communities the
Yes. 
While I am doing that, I should like to remind the honourable senator that even before the federal government balances the books, it is putting more money into transfers to the provinces. 
In fact, the government is raising the cash floor from $11 billion to $12.5 billion, the single largest reinvestment made by the federal government. 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Provinces-Effect on Atlantic Provinces 
Hon. Mabel M. DeWare :
Honourable senators, my figures show that, four years ago, the provinces received more than $19 billion in cash transfers for health, education and welfare through what was then known as the Canadian Assistance Program and Established Programs Financing. 
The government's math provides some good news, as the original plan was to give them even less.  
The problem is that some provinces will get less under the new scheme while others will get more. 
Indeed, seven of the ten provinces will actually see their cash transfers fall even further, including all of Atlantic Canada.  
The cash transfer to Nova Scotia will fall from $427 million to $411 million, which is a difference of $16 million. 
The transfer for Prince Edward Island will fall from $60 million to $59 million, which is a reduction of $1 million. 
The cash transfer to Newfoundland will fall from $281 million to $251 million, which is a difference of $30 million. 
New Brunswick will lose $11 million. 
The total loss to the Atlantic provinces is $58 million.  
At the same time, three provinces, Ontario, Alberta and British Columbia will see their cash payments actually rise. 
Atlantic Canada's loss is their gain.  
Can the Leader of the Government tell us if his government believes that it is fair to ask the provinces that can least afford it to continue to receive less money year after year by way of support for health, education and social assistance?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
I thank the honourable Senator DeWare for doing the mathematics for me. 
I only wish I had done it myself prior to coming into the Senate today. 
 develop new initiatives to address the rapid increase in tuberculosis and in Aboriginal communities ; and
 address in new rapid in and and the to Aboriginal diabetes initiatives ; develop tuberculosis communities
 and Aboriginal in diabetes to rapid address and the tuberculosis new ; develop communities increase initiatives
 rapid develop Aboriginal tuberculosis and diabetes and to increase ; in initiatives the in address new
enhance research and dissemination of health information focussed on the needs of Aboriginal people through a new Aboriginal Health Institute.  
 on Institute and of the needs Aboriginal a enhance through research new of dissemination information focussed Aboriginal . health Health people
 needs new . of research of the information enhance Aboriginal and a health dissemination focussed through on Health Institute people Aboriginal
 health a Aboriginal of research through people on Institute of needs and Health new focussed enhance Aboriginal information . the dissemination
 . Aboriginal of information Health health needs people dissemination research of a Aboriginal focussed the and new on Institute enhance through
 dissemination Aboriginal . research of focussed new enhance of health needs Aboriginal through information Health a Institute people on the and
 dissemination new of needs . information on through enhance Aboriginal Health a focussed of Institute and Aboriginal research people health the
 of focussed needs Health new Aboriginal . dissemination Institute through a research people enhance Aboriginal the on of information and health
 focussed information . of people Health on Aboriginal through a needs dissemination Aboriginal the research health and Institute of new enhance
 people on the needs health of Aboriginal new dissemination research of a . and Aboriginal information enhance focussed Institute through Health
 people a the on . of and research through focussed Health enhance Institute health information Aboriginal Aboriginal new dissemination needs of
 a the Aboriginal Aboriginal enhance focussed of on dissemination . research and health information of new Institute through people needs Health
 on research information enhance of of a focussed people dissemination Health Aboriginal Institute the and through . new Aboriginal needs health
 needs dissemination people and focussed of . through of health research information Health enhance the new Institute Aboriginal Aboriginal on a
 Aboriginal on . information of new a Health of and focussed people Aboriginal the dissemination Institute health research needs enhance through
 on Aboriginal the of Health research Aboriginal new of Institute information health needs focussed enhance a people through and . dissemination
 information Health people and of enhance Aboriginal focussed Institute Aboriginal of needs new a dissemination health research on the . through
Then the thought occurred to me that most lawyers do not either - and that includes a number of them in this chamber.  
My interest in this subject was piqued by a newspaper article where a detective was complaining about the awkward situation he would be in if this bill passed. 
Formerly, if he was pursuing someone into an apartment building, he could go in under the provisions of a hot pursuit and arrest the individual. 
Now, if the person being pursued enters an apartment building, and there are 50 or 60 apartments in the building, the detective is worrying that when he goes to a judge to get a warrant, does he have to get a warrant for each of the apartments in the building, because he really does not know which one he is in.  
Two people said they saw Mr. Feeney drive Mr. Boyle's truck from the scene. 
The police followed a truck to Mr. Feeney's residence. 
They found the truck parked outside the trailer, with blood leading from the truck into the trailer. 
They followed the normal procedure of knocking on the door and announcing they were police, and there was no answer. 
They said the door was open and they entered. 
There they found Mr. Feeney asleep. 
Obviously the bludgeoning of the victim had tired him and he had gone to sleep. 
He still had blood on his face and on his shirt. 
The police checked the trailer, and they found the money, stolen from Mr. Boyle, hidden under the mattress. 
They arrested Mr. Feeney under a warrantless arrest.  
I think that individual must have been trained by Sergeant Fiegenwald because there was certainly every reason to arrest Mr. Feeney.  
Prior to the Constitution Act, 1982, the police had that authority in the case of hot pursuit. 
It is my interpretation that they still possess that authority. 
It is not enshrined in the Criminal Code. 
It is one of those principles that came into our law from the British system. 
As Senator Cools pointed out, no statute was broken. 
 enhance research and dissemination of health information focussed on the needs of Aboriginal people through a new Aboriginal Institute .
 and dissemination focussed enhance Institute of research Aboriginal a through the needs information health people Health . on new of
 through of on new health of research the needs focussed and Health information enhance people Institute Aboriginal Aboriginal dissemination a
 people of new on dissemination and needs of enhance focussed Aboriginal a Aboriginal Institute . information research the Health through
The Government will work with its provincial partners and other interested parties to improve Canadian health information systems to improve decision making about health and health care across the country.  
 care and to partners health to and Canadian with parties information country the health other provincial its making decision . work health The improve across about Government interested will systems improve
 improve about making improve work Government its and The health . will across and care to with information health other systems health provincial to the country interested partners Canadian decision parties
 partners other provincial to interested Canadian with Government making information to will improve decision improve care across health about The parties the and country health and its health . systems work
 information and provincial to improve health about health its partners . Canadian with care health parties to improve interested work will systems making and other Government decision across country the The
 other country systems health The making information health and provincial its to interested Canadian and care will parties work to the improve . about improve across Government health partners decision with
 The improve health the health to and partners with parties care Government across interested country provincial health to its and decision other information will about improve systems Canadian . making work
 improve to health and other care information with the . country Canadian work making systems decision interested provincial health to across partners and health The about its improve Government parties will
 to health health making systems and health and across care other Government work will Canadian interested parties information the country about partners with decision to . improve provincial its improve The
 decision to making to other health information . with The interested about improve and and Government across partners improve its systems the country work health care provincial will Canadian parties health
 improve and Canadian country to partners will other and health decision to with parties systems its Government interested The work care making the health health . improve provincial about information across
 systems and its across country parties work health improve The with information interested partners . other care Government health will the to health Canadian improve decision about provincial making to and
 care will and country health to improve with systems parties about interested decision improve the health information health partners other work making . provincial across The Canadian its Government and to
 health interested and partners improve The parties improve across with the . provincial making its health to about work other Canadian decision care country health and Government systems information will to
 will The . work provincial systems making improve Government and its health health parties country information about health across with partners care the improve to to interested decision Canadian and other
 health and other with about The improve . partners making across systems interested improve its information care work and country Canadian health health provincial to the to decision parties will Government
 the about health its work with provincial health improve parties . health to interested systems The information Canadian partners across and to country care decision Government other making and will improve
The second group, the aboriginal groups within Quebec, claimed that this resolution detrimentally affected their rights. 
The report makes clear - and we came to this conclusion aided and abetted by legal advice and statements by both Quebec and federal ministers - that aboriginal rights were in no way, shape or form, affected by this resolution. 
We said so in the report.  
This left two groups, small but important, who claim to be detrimentally affected. 
It was not clear that the entirety of these two groups were objecting. 
These are the two groups to which Senator Bolduc referred.  
There were certain spokespersons representing these groups. 
They were French-speaking Protestants and a smaller group of English-speaking Roman Catholics. 
The Catholics were represented by English-speaking priests.  
Again, in Senator Bolduc's thoughtful speech, he refers to these groups. 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, I regret to interrupt once again. 
The clock now says six o'clock.  
Senator Carstairs :
There is agreement that we will not see the clock, Your Honour.  
Senator Grafstein :
It is not clear to me whether these witnesses represented the entire spectrum of the groups for whom they spoke. 
Having said that, their rights are of concern.  
However, it is clear that denominational teaching will continue inside the province of Quebec by Quebec law.  
It is difficult to see how their accessibility to denominational teaching in the public school system will be abrogated in the short run. 
 The Government will work with its provincial partners and other interested parties to improve Canadian health information systems to improve decision making about health and health care across the country
 across improve country Canadian with information to The to partners other provincial the and work and improve . health interested about health its systems decision care Government parties health making
 systems Canadian health the and The to its to improve making country provincial improve care . partners interested will across about work health with health and other decision parties Government
 systems Government The improve will interested care decision health health improve parties partners with Canadian the about other provincial information country and making and to to work . its health
Building Safer Communities 
 Safer Communities Building
 Communities Safer Building
 Building Communities Safer
 Building Communities Safer
 Safer Communities Building
 Communities Building Safer
 Safer Building Communities
 Building Communities Safer
 Safer Communities Building
 Safer Building Communities
 Communities Safer Building
 Safer Communities Building
 Safer Building Communities
 Safer Building Communities
 Communities Safer Building
 Communities Building Safer
Obviously, it is no small solace, unlike the case for many years in the province of Ontario, that minority denominational rights, religious education, was achieved, in part, through public funding in the province of Quebec. In other words, as Senator Lavoie-Roux pointed out, in the province of Ontario there is and was no public funding of other religious or denominational schools, unlike Ontario. 
I want to make specific reference to this point because I have some personal experience in this regard. 
Access to public funding in Quebec for denominational education remains available in Quebec. 
I find it hard to believe how the Province of Quebec in the future, even if the notwithstanding clauses are removed, would not continue to fund denominational training. 
Whether it is through a charter school, a public school system, or through a publicly funded private school system, denominational training to all groups, in my view, will continue in the province of Quebec for the foreseeable future.  
Since we are projecting the future, that is my prediction for the future.  
I wish to mention yet another aspect of the testimony referred to in the Reform Party opinion which is appended to the report.  
At the last minute, after all the testimony was taken, the Reform members of the committee introduced a long petition containing thousands of names objecting to the federal resolution. 
Every opportunity was presented for these voices to be heard during the course of the hearings. 
We did not deny them an opportunity to be heard. 
On the other hand, we were not given an opportunity by the Reform Party to cross-examine those petitioners or to decide what weight, if any, we should give to their petition.  
I concluded, honourable senators, that the overwhelming evidence was that the majority of the minorities affected by these rights and privilege were in favour of the amendments.  
The Roman Catholic Archbishops of Quebec and the Anglican Archbishop have letters on record in which they clearly indicate they did not oppose the amendment.  
I want to read those letters into the record because they are important.  
A different situation exists in Quebec. 
Nevertheless, our assembly did not oppose the choice to amend section 93. 
It has always been our conviction that the choice of means is the responsibility of the political authorities.  
They did not oppose.  
The Anglican Archbishop, Archbishop Andrew S. Hutchison, said the following at paragraph 2 of his letter dated November 3: 
The amendments proposed to Article 93 by the Quebec government, which would remove the obligation for the Quebec government to have confessional school boards, seems reasonable to us and in keeping with traditional positions enunciated by the Anglican church.  
 Safer Communities
 Communities Building
 Building Communities
 Building Communities
Safe communities are among the hallmarks of our Canadian identity. 
 . our of among Canadian Safe the identity hallmarks are communities
 among hallmarks our the are identity of Safe Canadian . communities
 Canadian . Safe hallmarks among communities the identity our of are
 . our Safe communities the are hallmarks among identity of Canadian
 the are identity hallmarks of our . Safe Canadian among communities
 . identity our Canadian are of the Safe communities among hallmarks
 Canadian Safe identity of the communities hallmarks are . our among
 the of identity hallmarks among Canadian are our communities Safe .
 identity hallmarks are our among . communities the Safe Canadian of
 . Safe of hallmarks among Canadian identity the communities are our
 the . of Safe identity communities are Canadian hallmarks our among
 communities our Safe hallmarks among the identity of Canadian . are
 hallmarks among identity are of our the Safe . Canadian communities
 Canadian communities the identity among of . are hallmarks Safe our
 among the Canadian of Safe hallmarks communities . are our identity
 Safe the communities are Canadian identity our of . hallmarks among
(Response to question raised by Hon. Noël A. Kinsella on October 23, 1997) 
The 50th Anniversary provides Canadians an opportunity to reflect on the importance of human rights in the life of the country, as they are a fundamental unifying value and an important part of our legacy to future generations.  
The objectives of the commemoration are to promote respect for human rights and responsibilities; mark Canada's national and international progress in implementing human rights standards; develop innovative and responsive approaches to emerging human rights issues; and, to link values highly esteemed by Canadians - values such as respect for the rule of law, dignity of the person, fairness, equitable treatment and democratic participation - to a broader government agenda related to social cohesion and social justice.  
Activities planned around December 10, 1997 for the launch of the 50th Anniversary commemorative year of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) 
National Defence 
Lack of Helicopter for Number of Navy Frigates-Government Position 
(Response to question raised by Hon. J. Michael Forrestall on November 20, 1997) 
An eleventh detachment is required for Canada's full time commitment of one ship to NATO's Standing Naval Force Atlantic.  
Maritime Command employs a three-tiered approach to fleet readiness: ships fulfilling national commitments are at High Readiness; ships in refit or major maintenance periods are at Extended Readiness; and, the remainder of the fleet is at Normal Readiness. 
Ships at Normal or Extended Readiness do not normally require Sea King detachments to fulfill their operational role. 
As well, certain taskings such as sovereignty, coastal and fisheries patrols may not require a Sea King detachment. 
Therefore, ships can be deployed at sea and operationally ready for a mission without a Sea King detachment embarked.  
Forestry 
Demolition of Government Laboratories-Possibility of Restoration of Funding-Government Position 
(Response to question raised by Hon. Mira Spivak on November 20, 1997) 
In response to the federal government's Program Review, the Canadian Forest Service (CFS) underwent strategic restructuring to rationalize its operations and to reduce infrastructure costs in the interest of providing maximum funding to research within the context of a reduced operating budget. 
As a consequence, Petawawa National Forest Institute (PNFI) was identified as one of the several Natural Resources Canada (NRCan) operations to be closed as part of a redefined departmental initiative to refocus our Science and Technology (S&T) programs. 
These programs address issues of national and international significance and service our clients through stronger, more effective partnerships with the provinces, industry and other players in the forest sector. 
All the major programs from PNFI have been transferred to the five current CFS research Centres and accordingly the majority of basic research activities from PNFI are ongoing. 
Claims of expenditure for upgrades prior to decommissioning were in fact for operational maintenance, purchase of equipment and some site enhancements. 
 Safe communities are the hallmarks of our Canadian identity .
 identity our are communities Canadian hallmarks . of among the
 of identity . Safe among hallmarks our Canadian are communities
 Safe among are the hallmarks Canadian of communities identity our
While the reported crime rate has decreased for four consecutive years, it is still too high. 
 it rate the , has too high reported four decreased consecutive for still . crime is While years
 reported the has rate , crime is for still high too decreased . years While four it consecutive
 reported four rate consecutive years decreased is for too still has While crime it high the , .
 . While high too still the it , reported decreased consecutive rate for four years crime is has
 the crime for has reported high . decreased it is too still While , rate four years consecutive
 , years for the has consecutive . reported While it decreased too crime rate high is still four
 crime rate While is four high still it too the has consecutive decreased for years reported , .
 rate has high years four the While crime for too decreased still , . consecutive reported is it
 has consecutive While is crime rate decreased for , . it high reported too four the still years
 for it . crime , has decreased high the rate years four still consecutive While is too reported
 While too is years high . still , decreased it consecutive four rate for reported has the crime
 rate still crime it is decreased too years has for While high the four reported . , consecutive
 high reported still is rate crime the for years too has four While consecutive it decreased , .
 for still high reported decreased , years the consecutive rate it . is has too four crime While
 high , too crime . years decreased has it for still rate is four consecutive reported While the
 While for decreased four reported it . rate , consecutive too still years high crime is has the
I don't know who, but I'm not responsible."  
There was not an iota of evidence to prove that what they were saying was correct. 
They did not take any responsibility after cancelling the EH-101 contract. 
They are still talking about it in cabinet. 
Nor did they take any responsibility after their failed strategy in job creation. 
Nor did they take responsibility after almost losing the country in the Quebec referendum. 
"Trust us," they say. 
One thing we can count on is if this government says it is good for Canada, it is not good for Canadians.  
At the time of the 1966 social contract with Canadians, the Liberals were in power. 
They entered into a social contract with their citizens. 
It was they who did it. 
"We will take your money and provide you with a pension," they said. 
As soon as they got their grubby hands on the cash, it was lent to the provinces at favourable interest rates. 
They were cheating Canadians who trusted that when they got old, they would have a pension. 
Baby boomers, who have paid all their working lives since the program's inception, now have the audacity to reach 50. 
We have had the audacity to reach 50!  
Senator Cools :
Not me.  
Senator Tkachuk :
Then they had the gall to limit their breeding, thus causing a situation whereby, 15 years from now, there will be fewer people working to pay for the people who turn 65 at that time. 
 While the crime rate has decreased for four consecutive years , it is still too high .
 it reported decreased crime four too , consecutive . still While years has is rate for high
 While decreased the consecutive is too has . , rate still four it reported years crime high
 the high crime . rate too is reported years While consecutive it decreased has still for ,
The Government is committed to ensuring that Canada remains a place where Canadians feel secure in their homes and on the streets of their communities. 
 secure in feel The ensuring on of that is communities committed place their remains the . Canadians their Canada and a to Government streets where homes
 a in the to their of that committed The where streets communities is homes their feel ensuring place . Canadians on Canada and Government secure remains
 on . in Government homes The the Canada place committed streets their their communities a is secure where to that feel remains and ensuring of Canadians
 to a committed homes . is remains place on of communities and their that the streets feel their ensuring Canadians in Canada Government secure The where
 their is communities of that homes streets a to place remains secure the on Canada committed Canadians and Government where The feel . their in ensuring
 and the streets feel Canada of Government where is a ensuring communities The in secure homes Canadians committed to that place their their on . remains
 remains the feel on that where a Canada their . and streets their is communities place Canadians of homes committed secure Government in to The ensuring
 ensuring their their and where a to Government the Canada . streets feel committed secure that is on Canadians The place in remains of communities homes
 The feel on communities Canada Canadians their is secure where homes streets and remains ensuring place . a their in committed that the Government to of
 The a Canada the remains streets communities Canadians place committed and their their is of on . in where feel that secure homes Government to ensuring
 the streets committed remains on place Canadians The that their of their Government secure ensuring feel in and a communities is homes Canada . to where
 remains that feel where a streets on Canadians the in their The place committed Canada secure their communities homes Government to of is ensuring . and
 feel the a Canadians that streets place Canada is committed ensuring their remains The . on of communities secure Government and to their homes in where
 The homes . to is Canadians where secure place on that their committed streets communities ensuring in feel a their and Canada remains the of Government
 place their a . Canada the secure to Government remains where Canadians is that feel their streets communities in on The homes committed ensuring of and
 homes is and the ensuring secure Canadians feel to a communities in Government their place that remains where The Canada . committed of on their streets
As others have said before me, people are living longer. 
While the age of 65 was formerly not achieved by many, it is being achieved by most today. 
That should be taken into consideration as a basis for increasing the age for retirement because it will decrease the burden on the young people who today believe that they will have to pay the whole shot for us.  
Senator Oliver continued: 
Honourable senators, in these times of slowing real incomes, increasing long-term interest rates, high personal taxes, increased CPP premiums, and ridiculously high EI premiums, where does the Leader of the Government believe that Canadians, who will receive less money from public plans, will find money to put away in their RRSPs to secure their own retirements?  
On November 6, Senator Oliver asked: 
Honourable senators, in 1995, the Department of Finance conducted a study on the impact of the increase in CPP premiums between 1986 and 1995. 
During that period, employee contributions rose from 1.85 per cent to 2.25 per cent of earnings, and the combined rate rose from 3.6 to 5 per cent.  
How many Canadians must pay the price for the planned increase in premiums?  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, I regret to interrupt the honourable senator, but his allotted time has expired.  
Senator Stratton :
I would like to finish my speech, if I may.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is leave granted for Honourable Senator Stratton to continue?  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
Senator Stratton :
Thank you, senators.  
In the Financial Post or The Globe and Mail it was recently explained that, as employers will have to pay higher CPP premiums and as most employers or companies have a limited budget for wages, they will have to pass on the cost to people through the price of their product, or they will have to lay people off, or they will have to go to contract workers.  
 The Government is committed to ensuring that Canada remains a place where Canadians feel secure in their homes and on streets of their communities .
 is . feel secure Government Canada homes in committed communities that streets their The remains a place where ensuring to on the their Canadians and
 Canadians remains committed Canada and . their communities a on their to place ensuring Government streets homes the where feel secure The that in of
 of ensuring a is remains in streets their where Canadians . committed that place on homes Canada to The the their secure communities feel and
A safe society depends on strong crime prevention efforts as well as traditional legal responses. 
 responses legal strong . as efforts prevention A traditional well society depends as on crime safe
 depends strong efforts as well traditional A responses on legal crime as safe society prevention .
 society responses strong efforts well . legal safe as A depends prevention on traditional crime as
 prevention strong crime responses society A . well traditional safe on depends legal efforts as as
 . society legal well as prevention strong responses as A safe depends on efforts traditional crime
 legal safe as responses depends society . efforts on prevention as well traditional crime strong A
 as . efforts safe traditional strong A legal responses depends society as crime well on prevention
 prevention crime A as responses well efforts legal strong safe society as on traditional depends .
 on prevention society efforts as responses strong crime . A depends well safe as traditional legal
 . well as as traditional prevention responses depends strong efforts A safe society on legal crime
 legal crime as society depends traditional A efforts safe strong responses well as . on prevention
 legal prevention society well A traditional depends safe efforts strong as . as responses on crime
 society A as on well . crime prevention strong legal traditional responses efforts depends safe as
 responses depends safe strong well traditional legal efforts as society as prevention crime A on .
 efforts as responses prevention on society legal well A crime as depends traditional safe strong .
 strong on A safe depends prevention legal as as responses society well crime traditional . efforts
There are, as all senators know, three committee structures in Parliament: the committees of the other place, our Senate committees - both special and standing - and the special joint and standing committees of the Senate and the House of Commons. 
I prefer Senate committees.  
Senate committees are less partisan, more thorough and more careful. 
Joint committees are a compromise, but I am confident that the Senate's practice of care and attention was, for the most part, adopted in the work of the special joint committee on the Quebec school question.  
It is true, as senators have pointed out, that the special joint committee was given a short time-frame to make its recommendations. 
However, committee members were assiduous in assuring all points of view were heard, unlike the Government of Quebec which chose not to have public hearings. 
This made our task doubly difficult.  
As senators, we are unlike any other evidence-gathering body. 
We gather evidence, we serve as our own advisors, seek our own counsel, we become judges, and we become the jury. 
We are the supreme court of the land when it comes to legislation. 
We must view the evidence before committees with care. 
I urge all senators, before they vote, to carefully review the full transcript of the evidence.  
Let me say at the outset that I was very sceptical, particularly after having read the Quebec resolution which was adopted unanimously in the Quebec Assembly, save for two abstentions, and which was quickly passed by the Quebec assembly requesting the federal government amend section 93 of the Constitution by deleting the subsections in so far as their application pertains to Quebec. 
These sections were incorporated in the British North American Act, 1867. 
The Quebec resolution in its fourth recital gave the Quebec assembly's opinion that the proposed amendment to section 93 requested in no way constituted recognition by the Quebec assembly of the Constitution Act, 1982, which was adopted without its consent.  
Honourable senators, noticing as you must that I am and remain a staunch supporter of the Constitution Act, 1982, this caused me great personal grief and concern.  
The first hurdle I had to overcome was whether or not the wording of the Quebec resolution on its face was so invidious, so egregious and so inconsistent that the recital made it inoperable and, in the process, would defeat its own request to amend the 1867 provisions by the mechanisms of the 1982 Constitution.  
I asked myself how the Province of Quebec could be asking for an amendment to the Constitution contained in the 1867 British North America Act, which was now part of the 1982 Constitution, while recognizing that the only methodology available to Parliament would be via the Constitution Act, 1982.  
Section 43 of the 1982 Constitution contains bilateral amendment processes between the federal government and provinces where their interests are solely engaged. 
Clearly, the only highway, the only path the Government of Quebec or the assembly of Quebec could take to achieve its objective was via the 1982 Constitution.  
 safe society depends on strong crime prevention efforts as well as traditional legal responses .
 as A prevention efforts strong society crime legal . as on responses well depends traditional
 prevention as traditional as crime society strong safe legal . on responses well A depends
 strong prevention efforts . depends on as crime society responses legal traditional well safe A
Governments around the world are developing community-based crime prevention programs.  
 are based developing crime community . world Governments prevention - programs around the
 based programs community prevention the - developing around are world . crime Governments
 Governments crime around community world developing . prevention programs are - the based
 the Governments programs community - are around crime prevention developing . world based
 Governments prevention the world are developing . crime around community programs based -
 crime are . programs world the Governments prevention based developing community - around
 world community developing Governments programs around are based prevention . - crime the
 . world developing are - community crime Governments prevention around programs the based
 - are . based Governments world crime developing around community programs prevention the
 community Governments developing based the around . world crime are programs - prevention
 the prevention - developing around world . crime Governments are programs community based
 the based - around programs community world developing crime prevention . Governments are
 prevention Governments based developing . crime are - world community programs the around
 world crime around prevention Governments are based . the programs developing - community
 the crime prevention based developing community Governments around . world - programs are
 prevention Governments based are world - community programs crime developing around . the
That is not the question.  
Senator Grafstein :
That is what the Constitution says.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
I do not disagree.  
Senator Grafstein :
That is what section 93 says.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
No, section 93 does not say that.  
Senator Grafstein :
The Province of Quebec, by its lawfully elected assembly, has requested a resolution amending the Constitution. 
How can I ask them to respect the Constitution if I do not respect the Constitution? 
I respect the Constitution.  
Honourable senators, this is a lawful request done in a lawful way. 
Perhaps certain words are egregious, but it is done in a lawful way, and I am prepared to support them. 
To my mind, the fact that they are prepared to proceed with their reforms before we legislate in any way, shape or form is their business; it is not my business. 
My business is to uphold the Constitution when they request we uphold processes under the Constitution.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
The reform of the school system in Quebec has nothing to do with the Constitution, even less with section 93. 
That was admitted in front of the committee.  
 Governments around the world are developing community - based prevention programs .
 world based around - community programs Governments . developing prevention the crime
 - world crime the developing around community prevention . programs Governments based
 world crime - are programs the around based developing community . prevention
increase funding for community-based crime prevention initiatives to $30 million per year; 
 $ - million community 30 initiatives prevention ; for to based per funding year crime increase
 based funding crime increase community for ; - per $ initiatives million 30 year prevention to
 for ; increase $ prevention based year 30 per million crime community to funding - initiatives
 30 initiatives for community crime per based year ; prevention $ to million - funding increase
 crime increase funding year 30 - to based for $ community prevention per million ; initiatives
 ; for to - year $ 30 million funding initiatives increase crime per based community prevention
 crime increase 30 year initiatives - for million prevention ; $ based per funding community to
 ; crime per million initiatives 30 increase year $ to community based funding prevention - for
 $ initiatives based prevention funding year for crime 30 - ; million increase community to per
 based - to per increase community funding ; crime initiatives $ prevention year for million 30
 based $ increase for per year prevention community crime to funding million - initiatives ; 30
 million year $ to community for funding initiatives based ; increase crime - 30 prevention per
 funding prevention year increase $ 30 for community per to million ; based crime - initiatives
 to initiatives increase $ ; year crime funding per community million based prevention for - 30
 increase 30 million $ per prevention initiatives for - to based crime community funding ; year
 $ based 30 - prevention crime per funding community to million increase for year initiatives ;
The Senate proceeded to consideration of the sixth report of the Standing Committee on Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration (budgets for certain committees), presented in the Senate on December 4, 1997.  
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, I move, on behalf of Senator Rompkey, the adoption of this report.  
Motion agreed to and report adopted.  
Telecommunications Act Teleglobe Canada Reorganization and Divestiture Act 
Bill to Amend-First Reading 
The Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C-17, to amend the Telecommunications Act and the Teleglobe Canada Reorganization and Divestiture Act. 
Bill read first time.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this bill be read the second time?  
On motion of Senator Carstairs, bill placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading on Thursday, December 11, 1997.  
Canada Marine Bill 
First Reading 
The Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C-9, for making the system of Canadian ports competitive, efficient and commercially oriented, providing for the establishing of port authorities and the divesting of certain harbours and ports, for the commercialization of the St. Lawrence Seaway and ferry services and other matters related to maritime trade and transport and amending the Pilotage Act and amending and repealing other Acts as a consequence.  
Bill read first time.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this bill be read the second time?  
On motion of Senator Carstairs, bill placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading on Thursday, December 11, 1997.  
Aboriginal Peoples 
Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples-Committee Authorized to Study Recommendations 
 increase funding for community - based prevention initiatives to $ 30 million per year ;
 increase - crime ; 30 per community for million $ prevention based funding to year
 ; increase based community to per 30 year prevention for - $ initiatives million crime
 $ community - crime million to 30 for based per funding prevention year initiatives ;
develop alternatives to incarceration for low-risk, non-violent offenders, such as sentencing reforms, community diversion programs, and alternative sanctions; and 
 , - such low alternative - incarceration for develop programs non alternatives risk violent , sanctions ; and , offenders and community diversion to as sentencing reforms ,
 , , sentencing , to and risk alternative - community as reforms develop incarceration ; violent - alternatives diversion programs non and offenders , sanctions such for low
 incarceration sentencing such and - sanctions develop alternative to ; - risk , low , offenders , as non diversion programs reforms community for and violent , alternatives
 such sentencing non and community , risk alternative - sanctions to reforms develop offenders , , low programs violent alternatives as ; incarceration diversion for - and ,
 , offenders - risk as and ; programs for - such incarceration sanctions alternative reforms develop , sentencing , low , diversion violent alternatives community non and to
 - , , - non , to develop , offenders reforms and sentencing risk low diversion as community violent programs such alternatives ; and sanctions for alternative incarceration
 risk - alternative for and sanctions such , as sentencing non develop violent , alternatives offenders community low , diversion - reforms , and ; programs to incarceration
 offenders - and low develop for diversion reforms to as and community non alternatives - such , alternative ; , violent , , sanctions programs sentencing risk incarceration
 , programs - to and such low risk and alternative ; for as incarceration sentencing develop offenders sanctions - alternatives reforms , non community , violent diversion ,
 offenders diversion such low and , alternative and community for as - risk incarceration sanctions , programs develop violent non , to ; alternatives reforms - sentencing ,
 risk - sanctions violent and develop alternative alternatives as reforms - offenders , , and for low community , diversion incarceration such ; programs sentencing , non to
 reforms - community risk for sanctions - , offenders and ; , alternatives low incarceration violent alternative as , and sentencing diversion programs such non , to develop
 reforms , violent to community , risk for programs and , sanctions ; incarceration develop , - sentencing alternatives such diversion and low offenders non alternative as -
 develop sanctions ; for - offenders community diversion as and low alternative , risk , - programs non violent , reforms to alternatives and sentencing incarceration such ,
 such and and violent non , offenders , , - , for ; community risk low - as sentencing sanctions alternatives to diversion alternative develop incarceration reforms programs
 for diversion - offenders programs - alternative and sanctions incarceration non community , as to violent , risk alternatives , sentencing , reforms develop such low ; and
He was one of the top bureaucrats and one of the top men in the Quebec government at one time. 
He brings that experience to this forum.  
I would prefer to ask this question of the government side, but no one will speak further on it. 
Therefore, I will ask Senator Bolduc.  
This involves a question that I asked Senator Kirby yesterday. 
It is a question of accountability. 
In theory, it is possible that this fund will become larger than the entire budget of the federal government in the years to come. 
Yet we are placing it in the hands of 12 people.  
Does the Honourable Senator Bolduc concur, as Senator Kirby did, that there should be some scrutiny by Senate and House of Commons committees whereby these 12 people who will be sitting on this board will be under a certain amount of scrutiny before they are placed in this lofty, powerful, very responsible position?  
Senator Bolduc :
Honourable senators, that is a very good question. 
There is one thing in the bill that is very acceptable. 
The Auditor General will be able to look at the management of the Investment Board.  
As a result, there will be some accountability in the form of an audit. 
According to Mr. Massé's report, there are 85 to 90 different government organizations. 
This is all very interesting, but none of them will have as much money as the one we are talking about. 
We are talking about an annual amount on the order of 15 per cent to 20 per cent of Canada's gross national product. 
It is an enormous amount. 
I therefore think there has to be some sort of accountability, and one of the ways to achieve that is for parliamentarians to be involved in drafting the Auditor General's report; in my view, there should be an amendment along these lines, to guarantee that that is the case.  
Hon. Jerahmiel S. Grafstein :
 develop alternatives to incarceration for low - , non - violent offenders , such as sentencing reforms , community diversion programs , and alternative sanctions ; and
 incarceration alternatives ; offenders non risk for diversion reforms violent , such and programs as and to sanctions sentencing community - low alternative develop - , ,
 risk - as such programs to community violent offenders develop , sanctions alternatives alternative , sentencing non diversion , reforms - ; , and incarceration for low
 develop such , alternatives and - violent sentencing sanctions diversion reforms to alternative incarceration programs risk , as community , for , non and - ; low
integrate information systems of all partners in the criminal justice system.  
 all of justice partners information the system criminal . in systems integrate
 systems integrate system of justice all criminal information partners . the in
 partners justice integrate systems information criminal of in system the . all
 the criminal . justice of partners information systems in integrate system all
 partners integrate . systems criminal justice in the all of information system
 of information partners . criminal the in all integrate systems system justice
 information the . partners systems criminal justice in of all integrate system
 systems justice all partners . of integrate criminal system in information the
 of information partners system . in systems justice all criminal integrate the
 of justice information . system integrate all criminal partners the systems in
 systems justice partners all of system criminal the integrate . information in
 information all system partners . systems criminal of justice the in integrate
 information of all the justice . system in criminal integrate systems partners
 partners justice all system of information integrate in . systems criminal the
 of partners criminal system all information integrate . in systems justice the
 all systems . system criminal partners justice of in integrate information the
Respectfully submitted, 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this bill be read the third time?  
On motion of Senator Butts, bill placed on the Orders of the Day for third reading at the next sitting of the Senate.  
Income Tax Conventions Implementation Act, 1997 
Report of Committee 
Hon. Michael Kirby , Chairman of the Standing Senate Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce, presented the following report: 
Tuesday, December 9, 1997 
The Standing Senate Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce has the honour to present its 
SIXTH REPORT 
Your Committee, to which was referred the Bill C-10, Act to implement a convention between Canada and Sweden, a convention between Canada and the Republic of Kazakhstan, a convention between Canada and the Republic of Iceland and a convention between Canada and the Kingdom of Denmark for the avoidance of double taxation and the prevention of fiscal evasion with respect to taxes on income and to amend the Canada-Netherlands Income Tax Convention Act, 1986 and the Canada-United States Tax Convention Act, 1984, has examined the said Bill in obedience to its Order of Reference dated December 8, 1997, and now reports the same without amendment.  
Respectfully submitted, 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this bill be read the third time?  
On motion of Senator Kirby, bill placed on the Orders of the Day for third reading at the next sitting of the Senate.  
Present State and Future of Agriculture 
Report of Agriculture and Forestry Committee Tabled 
Hon. Leonard J. Gustafson :
Honourable senators, I have the honour to table the second report of the Standing Senate Committee on Agriculture and Forestry, which requests that the committee be empowered to incur special expenses pursuant to the Procedural Guidelines for the Financial Operation of Senate Committees .  
I ask that this report be printed as an appendix to the Journals of the Senate of this day.  
 integrate information systems of all partners in the justice system .
 criminal partners information system systems the justice integrate . in all
 partners . justice systems criminal of integrate system information all the
 partners the of all information criminal integrate justice . in system
Creating Opportunity for Young Canadians 
 for Opportunity Creating Canadians Young
 Creating for Canadians Young Opportunity
 Opportunity Canadians Creating Young for
 Creating for Young Opportunity Canadians
 Canadians Creating for Young Opportunity
 for Opportunity Creating Young Canadians
 for Creating Young Canadians Opportunity
 Young for Canadians Creating Opportunity
 Canadians for Opportunity Creating Young
 for Opportunity Young Creating Canadians
 Creating for Young Opportunity Canadians
 for Canadians Young Creating Opportunity
 for Opportunity Canadians Young Creating
 Canadians Opportunity Creating Young for
 Canadians Creating Young Opportunity for
 Young for Opportunity Canadians Creating
Claude Ryan, an old friend of mine and the then Minister of Education, had galvanized that reform process over a decade ago in Quebec. 
It was equally clear to me that the existing school structures were in desperate need of renovation, particularly in light of the overlapping school structures in Quebec and the financial restraints facing all governments.  
Rather than an historic essay, perhaps it would be simpler if I could share with you my thought processes and the evidence I found as a member of the Standing Senate Committee on the Quebec Resolution Requesting Constitutional Change.  
First, a brief word about committees and their work. 
There are, as all senators know, three committee structures in Parliament: the committees of the other place, our Senate committees - both special and standing - and the special joint and standing committees of the Senate and the House of Commons. 
I prefer Senate committees.  
Senate committees are less partisan, more thorough and more careful. 
Joint committees are a compromise, but I am confident that the Senate's practice of care and attention was, for the most part, adopted in the work of the special joint committee on the Quebec school question.  
It is true, as senators have pointed out, that the special joint committee was given a short time-frame to make its recommendations. 
However, committee members were assiduous in assuring all points of view were heard, unlike the Government of Quebec which chose not to have public hearings. 
This made our task doubly difficult.  
As senators, we are unlike any other evidence-gathering body. 
We gather evidence, we serve as our own advisors, seek our own counsel, we become judges, and we become the jury. 
We are the supreme court of the land when it comes to legislation. 
We must view the evidence before committees with care. 
I urge all senators, before they vote, to carefully review the full transcript of the evidence.  
Let me say at the outset that I was very sceptical, particularly after having read the Quebec resolution which was adopted unanimously in the Quebec Assembly, save for two abstentions, and which was quickly passed by the Quebec assembly requesting the federal government amend section 93 of the Constitution by deleting the subsections in so far as their application pertains to Quebec. 
These sections were incorporated in the British North American Act, 1867. 
The Quebec resolution in its fourth recital gave the Quebec assembly's opinion that the proposed amendment to section 93 requested in no way constituted recognition by the Quebec assembly of the Constitution Act, 1982, which was adopted without its consent.  
Honourable senators, noticing as you must that I am and remain a staunch supporter of the Constitution Act, 1982, this caused me great personal grief and concern.  
 Creating for Young Canadians
 Young Creating Canadians for
 Young Opportunity for Canadians
 Opportunity for Young Canadians
Today's generation of young Canadians is the best educated in our history. 
 ' of best history educated the in Canadians our . generation Today is young s
 is in the s . Today best educated of generation Canadians our history ' young
 best is Canadians history ' generation of the young educated . our Today in s
 best s young the ' generation is educated our of in history Today . Canadians
 in Today history Canadians the best educated . generation our young ' of is s
 Canadians history ' the Today of in . educated s is generation young our best
 of is Canadians educated in Today best ' generation . young history the our s
 Today history . Canadians educated ' of in generation our s best the is young
 history s our of young in Canadians . educated best Today is ' generation the
 educated the is history generation ' of . Today in best Canadians young s our
 s of our young generation best is Canadians Today in ' educated the history .
 history the Canadians our Today ' s generation . in best educated of is young
 the our . Today educated in best of history s Canadians young is ' generation
 educated best our history s the generation in Canadians young ' is of . Today
 . history the young Today in our ' generation Canadians is s educated best of
 ' young the of in best s Today generation Canadians . history educated our is
The negotiations are in a state of flux at the present time and it might be premature for me to speculate on what the outcome might be.  
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Target Year for Implementation of Government Position taken at Kyoto-Government Position 
Hon. Mira Spivak :
I thank the Leader of the Government for his answer. 
I should like to point out that Manitoba is distinct from Alberta, as are all provinces.  
In their December 1 announcement, the government also revealed that not until 1999 would they be able to provide more detail as to the costs and specific actions that would be required to meet our Kyoto commitments. 
Assuming that it will take some time to implement the actions that the government will propose in 1999, it could be the year 2000, 2001, 2002 or 2003 before the government takes steps to meet its Kyoto targets. 
Some of these actions will undoubtedly entail negotiations and agreements with provincial governments, which means it could be as late as 2006 before the government can meet the targets which were set out.  
Perhaps the Leader of the Government in the Senate could tell us in which year implementation of the Kyoto decisions will begin, because, surely, that must have been taken into consideration prior to the Kyoto meeting.  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Yes, honourable senators, discussions were held, and consideration was given to when the new objectives or conclusions of the Kyoto conference might be put in place, or kick into place, if I may use that terminology.  
I do not believe a final agreement has been reached on that. 
I know that the Government of Canada will cooperate with the provinces and territories and, in partnership with industry, the environmental groups and individual Canadians, develop a practical, flexible, step-by-step plan for reducing emissions. 
Many economic analyses of potential costs attributable to taking action to reduce emissions have been done, but no conclusions have been reached respecting timing or actual costs.  
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Informetrica Study on Meeting Targets-Government Position 
Hon. Mira Spivak :
Honourable senators, late last week, the consulting firm Informetrica released a study entitled, "The Scale of the Challenge for Reducing Canadian Greenhouse Gas Emissions." 
This report states: 
We conclude that there is almost no chance of meeting this goal in Canada under any reasonable economic scenario...  
And I stress this last part: 
 Today ' s generation of young Canadians is the best educated in our history
 . Today is educated best generation history the of ' Canadians young in s
 young s the ' our in history generation best is Canadians Today of educated
 . Today ' generation is s in of best history our Canadians the educated
Young Canadians are living in a country well positioned for opportunities in the new economy. 
 economy . are positioned in country living Young opportunities Canadians well a in new the for
 . country living positioned Canadians Young new well in economy the are in a opportunities for
 economy the well new Canadians . Young positioned country in a are living for in opportunities
 Young new in . are living the Canadians country economy a opportunities in positioned well for
 opportunities are country the living positioned in Young Canadians well . in economy for new a
 opportunities . country well a are the positioned new Young living in in Canadians economy for
 opportunities Young . the country positioned well economy new for living a in are Canadians in
 opportunities country . for in well living positioned the Young a are in economy Canadians new
 opportunities economy well for a Young the are country Canadians in in new positioned . living
 a living Canadians the . are well opportunities positioned for new country Young in in economy
 in the country in economy for are opportunities positioned Canadians well new a Young living .
 in Young well are in country opportunities the economy positioned Canadians new living a . for
 Young well the Canadians economy positioned living opportunities in in a for are . new country
 country for in the new Canadians are positioned . living Young a economy well opportunities in
 in economy well country a Young living are Canadians the opportunities for new in positioned .
 . economy the Young well a Canadians living country in for opportunities new are in positioned
( d ) the Court, by its Order of November 19, 1997 that Bill C-16 must be enacted by December 19, 1997, is impeding proceedings in Parliament and is subordinating the Senate of Canada; and 
( e ) the Court is usurping the royal prerogative of the Sovereign who, with the advice and consent of Parliament, keeps and upholds the Queen's Peace and the public peace and security of all.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, I have a problem. 
Offhand, I do not know if you can amend a reasoned amendment. 
I must look at the precedents. 
Debate adjourned to await the ruling of the Speaker. 
Quebec 
Linguistic School Boards-Amendment to Section 93 of Constitution-Report of Special Joint Committee Adopted 
On the Order: 
Resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Pépin, seconded by the Honourable Senator Lucier, for the adoption of the Report of the Special Joint Committee to Amend Section 93 of the Constitution Act, 1867 concerning the Quebec School System, deposited with the Clerk of the Senate on November 7, 1997.  
Hon. John Lynch-Staunton (Leader of the Opposition) :
Honourable senators, I would like first of all to thank the co-chairmen of the joint committee, our colleague Senator Lucie Pépin, and the other co-chairman, MP Denis Paradis, for their excellent work in rather exceptional and sometimes trying circumstances.  
In fact, as has been said here and elsewhere, considering the decision of the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs that government support for the amendment to section 93 of the Constitution was already an established fact and that the government majority in committee left no doubt as to what conclusions it would reach, the committee's role could have been limited to that of a rubber stamp.  
Furthermore, the committee was not allowed to hold hearings outside Ottawa and was required to table its report no later than November 7, 1997, with only three weeks to hear witnesses and prepare its report. 
What a contrast with the extremely slow process followed by many less important bills that gather dust for months on parliamentary shelves before receiving Royal Assent.  
In his November 27, 1997 speech, Senator Wood gave a very good description of the strait-jacket in which the joint committee had to work. 
Everything was rushed. 
No announcements were made that hearings were being held, contrary to what is usually done. 
The list of witnesses changed almost from hour to hour. 
 Young Canadians living in a country well positioned for opportunities in the new economy .
 are in Canadians country opportunities new Young for a well the positioned economy . living
 country living . the well in Canadians in positioned new Young opportunities are a for
 well opportunities country new the a in living Canadians are in Young economy for .
Yet, the level of unemployment among Canadians between the ages of 18 and 25 is unacceptably high. 
 unacceptably . Canadians the 18 high level Yet ages of the and unemployment 25 of , between among is
 of the Canadians Yet between ages 18 level 25 unacceptably unemployment and of the high , among is .
 of among 25 Yet 18 unemployment and between high Canadians level . , unacceptably the of is ages the
 18 of ages high unemployment . Canadians 25 the of the among is unacceptably between level , and Yet
 18 Canadians of high Yet , between of the the and ages unacceptably level unemployment . among 25 is
 the of level and of 18 high ages unacceptably the unemployment is , 25 Canadians Yet between . among
 25 , Yet unacceptably ages among unemployment and . high level between of 18 Canadians the the is of
 . unemployment of 18 , Yet and high of ages the 25 among between level unacceptably is the Canadians
 25 level ages among unacceptably Canadians of the high the is of Yet . between 18 and unemployment ,
 Yet unemployment Canadians high level of ages . between among , is and the of the 18 25 unacceptably
 between unacceptably 25 among high . unemployment Yet ages is of of , level the and Canadians the 18
 of Canadians level Yet 18 of is unemployment the unacceptably , ages . between among and 25 high the
 Yet high of 25 , the unemployment the unacceptably level and . among ages is of 18 Canadians between
 the , of 18 Yet 25 is among . between Canadians unemployment high the of unacceptably and level ages
 is Yet Canadians and unemployment level , 25 high the ages . 18 of unacceptably between the of among
 . high of 18 of between among 25 the , level ages unemployment unacceptably Canadians the and is Yet
I would like to finish my speech, if I may.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is leave granted for Honourable Senator Stratton to continue?  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
Senator Stratton :
Thank you, senators.  
In the Financial Post or The Globe and Mail it was recently explained that, as employers will have to pay higher CPP premiums and as most employers or companies have a limited budget for wages, they will have to pass on the cost to people through the price of their product, or they will have to lay people off, or they will have to go to contract workers.  
The concern is the long-term effect this huge increase will have on full-time jobs.  
On November 18, Senator Oliver said: 
Canadians who turn 69, 70, and 71 this year have only another month and a half to convert their RRSPs to an annuity or a RRIF. 
If they fail to do so, they could lose up to one-half of every dollar they have in their RRSPs to taxes; yet many of these same Canadians are not aware that the government has lowered the age to 69 and of the deadline for making the conversion.  
Indeed, a survey conducted last spring found that only about 30 per cent of RRSP holders aged 50 to 70 were aware of these new rules. 
Bearing this in mind, and considering the confusion that now exists about this matter, will the government consider extending the conversion time so as to ensure that no senior citizen is forced to hand over half of his or her life savings as a result of being caught off-guard by this proposal?  
In other words, will the government ensure that they are not nailed with more taxes?  
Senator Oliver continued: 
We were told that the net tax grab from this and other measures that restrict tax assistance for retirement savings, notably yet another freeze in RRSP contributions, would total about $40 million this year and $175 million next year. 
We were not told how much of that came from lowering the age for RRSP conversions.  
When that many Canadians are unaware of what is happening, we have a severe problem.  
On November 20, I said: 
 Yet the level of unemployment among Canadians between the ages of 18 and 25 is unacceptably high .
 18 between ages of among the level high unemployment Canadians Yet unacceptably the . and of 25 is
 among . the high Canadians unemployment is and between level of 18 25 Yet ages unacceptably , the
 of level ages 18 Canadians of the high and is Yet between . , 25 the unacceptably among
The federal, provincial and territorial governments will act to address this problem, and First Ministers and territorial leaders will be working on this issue when they meet this fall.  
 they The First and , and , fall territorial will leaders and be working this this governments federal meet this problem provincial . territorial will on issue Ministers address act to when
 and territorial Ministers will territorial meet working this problem this leaders act they , provincial on this to fall and when will issue First be and . The address , governments federal
 to First leaders . territorial address this fall governments when issue and this and provincial Ministers be this act working meet , will on territorial The they and problem will , federal
 , territorial this this federal territorial act when they fall provincial governments will The leaders this and and problem and be . working meet will First to issue on , Ministers address
 will leaders , , be First fall problem The territorial they federal Ministers and governments to issue will working provincial territorial when this on and this this act address and meet .
 territorial when this act . territorial First provincial to , and working this and governments they The and issue address fall on problem this will will , be federal meet Ministers leaders
 First , and working and territorial and on this , federal act they territorial fall will this issue address this . be problem governments leaders Ministers The provincial meet to will when
 and will to act working governments this meet address , and problem . territorial provincial , they Ministers First federal will be leaders fall issue when and territorial on this The this
 , this federal territorial and to this on territorial and working Ministers problem act will issue they fall when , and leaders meet governments provincial be address will First this . The
 problem First address and . meet when and governments will , they this Ministers federal The fall territorial issue to this this be act working on , territorial and leaders will provincial
 they this be address , The this , this federal fall Ministers will and and on will territorial territorial working act and . leaders issue meet provincial to First problem governments when
 and issue and First problem to this they , this leaders this will fall territorial when , The . territorial meet be federal act governments will and address on working Ministers provincial
 will governments address problem . fall , be and they meet this when The and provincial issue act leaders to territorial this federal territorial Ministers , working and will on First this
 First when will provincial territorial this be act The and federal leaders meet . , this to address , problem fall on and they territorial Ministers will this governments working and issue
 problem territorial to this they The , when will and territorial working this Ministers federal on leaders and . act address governments , issue will meet and fall First this be provincial
 federal act provincial problem they address and , and working territorial First meet fall will The territorial to this and leaders issue Ministers on , when . governments this be this will
Even the Liberals can do that.  
The government is unable to manage the present program so it wants more money to enable it to manage it better. 
We must remember that the author of Bill C-2 is Paul Martin. 
Paul Martin is a real smart guy. 
We remember that he had to stoop to bribing three Atlantic provinces, with other people's money, to fulfil his promises of harmonization. 
He later apologized to the Canadian people for misinforming them.  
Meanwhile, the Prime Minister and Deputy Prime Minister, Sheila Copps, were promising to get rid of the GST, but they did not really mean it, they said, although they were caught out on tape not telling the truth.  
Paul Martin promised in the old Red Book that the government would cancel the helicopter purchase and use the money to pay for more social programs. 
Now, $900 million later, we have no helicopters that fly safely. 
He penned the Red Book to renegotiate the free trade agreement. 
He took all the kudos after the 1993 election.  
Now he says: "Rush Bill C-2. 
Trust me." 
The minister says that he needs the bill now to satisfy an agreement with the provinces. 
I have heard of no agreement. 
No one here has heard of an agreement. 
If someone on the other side knows of an agreement, please tell me.  
We have not heard one province asking us to abandon our parliamentary responsibilities and rush this bill through by January 1 on the threat that they will cancel their agreement. 
The Minister of Finance is rushing so that he can get another $400 million in taxes for the 1997 tax year. 
The brunt of this bill is being borne by middle- and lower-income workers.  
 The federal , provincial and territorial governments will act to address this problem and First Ministers and territorial leaders will be working on this issue when they meet this fall .
 The problem territorial on this act issue , territorial . and will this and will address they meet working Ministers provincial fall be this leaders federal governments , and when First
 this and problem governments will working The and this , act First this and provincial issue leaders territorial they on to meet when will federal . fall territorial Ministers be ,
 , federal act address issue leaders and Ministers territorial territorial . fall this provincial First on working , this will and be this governments The meet and they to problem when
To secure our future as a society, our immediate challenge is to make sure that our young generation makes a successful transition to the world of work, that young people who want to continue to learn have access to education, and that young people who found it difficult getting started in the workplace get a second chance.  
 education people a , immediate and is society that learn successful young the secure second our to people that To future have challenge who our it work to getting found world the continue started young transition want makes get to as sure our who to a a young generation , make , . of that to in access chance difficult workplace
 that get people a access young as it , getting make chance second people To that the have education a to young to , young our makes that world found successful a secure difficult , generation and workplace the is want continue challenge to future to society . immediate our in sure of work who to learn transition our who started
 , the work to a workplace that found in who of as to who that continue our successful started challenge to make , to the have young education is . our and sure young world people it To a society young our chance people that , generation a to makes transition getting get future learn immediate secure difficult second want access
 , makes that education get generation who people have a future young . access of that our want society young challenge second to young getting a as it in our , and world found chance secure learn to our that started make continue to people difficult is to the , transition immediate workplace sure work To a successful who the to
 the continue that to the started and makes get , workplace have to it access , difficult second to our sure learn society our work as young people successful found of people young To future to secure world young a , education is make in want . who getting a our chance transition that a to immediate generation challenge who that
 to challenge . future make to and sure that our our transition as of want people successful young , secure who get , young a chance young work is the difficult that our a the found have workplace makes generation getting a second it to To people continue that in learn to to world who society , education immediate started access
 in to society , the our second our a young successful . access , transition to want young work , found the get world have to that learn young future getting make challenge who sure our education and people who a as of is difficult to immediate secure to makes To workplace people continue a generation that that chance it started
 who future want continue the make to to generation our of access to transition To started learn that , getting challenge second a and chance a workplace difficult found , that our who sure secure our young as education , young work have it that people immediate to makes society successful the . is a to young world get people in
 to in getting immediate . challenge , education work to makes get a second chance learn access secure sure young young it that difficult future young continue world generation a to as want To people a people , workplace who , and successful is have make society started found that our the to that the to of who our our transition
 as secure to , chance To future to young difficult and , have successful young society workplace generation who that a who that immediate get our to learn is world to that continue the in a getting work , people the of our education a found makes want sure people transition access our young challenge make . it second started to
 immediate continue that , a getting workplace of to young chance our to is our young make who challenge education to people work found learn second access have a the that . it successful who people in our the as young to that to transition future society To sure world get a , secure difficult and started makes generation , want
 who is to the learn that transition that to started and our people , young , of to . access workplace people secure who to society chance young that To a future getting want young generation second a as found a it work get our difficult the , make immediate our makes have world challenge successful continue in sure education to
 future to and of people immediate in who a , continue young that challenge society who make to education the as have work our generation that is a learn chance world . makes young successful that our the difficult secure it access to to workplace our to second want get transition young getting , sure To a people , found started
 who people our it to , work to to access makes and who started young transition . successful challenge a of continue getting get workplace difficult is our future secure education a immediate , that that the world , found generation our as have people in make to second young the learn a young sure to want To society chance that
 our our second . getting society started workplace to a that secure education difficult access to to people people that , it to to a sure who young the young learn who immediate get generation in make world transition of , and challenge want future To that our work have found makes successful as is a continue chance young , the
 To people get is that continue , our a as a who that chance makes , started generation successful of found in workplace to society world make have secure to our and challenge future to it want to second getting who immediate the a young to learn young our people education difficult sure that . , young access the work transition
Search and Rescue Helicopter Replacement Program-Possible Cabinet Discussion on Awarding Contract for Helicopter Purchase-Government Position 
Hon. J. Michael Forrestall :
Honourable senators, did the cabinet consider the awarding of a contract for new search and rescue helicopters this morning? 
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, my honourable friend would be the first to recognize that it is not appropriate for me to comment on any discussions that took place in cabinet this morning. 
Hon. Lowell Murray :
Would it be appropriate for the honourable minister to let us know whether it was considered last week?  
Senator Graham :
The matter of the helicopters is under active consideration by the government.  
Cabinet met last Thursday. 
Senator Forrestall :
If that is the last cabinet meeting before the Christmas break, I gather we will not see any decision until sometime in the new year.  
Senator Graham :
If that is a question, I would hope my honourable friend is wrong, and that I am correct in saying that it is to be hoped that there will be a decision before the end of this year.  
Senator Forrestall :
Cabinet will meet again, then. 
I am pleased to hear that.  
Search and Rescue Helicopter Replacement Program-State of Sea King Helicopter Fleet-Government Position 
Hon. J. Michael Forrestall :
Where are the other six? 
 To secure our future as a society our immediate challenge is to make sure that our young generation makes a successful transition to the world of work , that young people who want to continue to learn have access to education , and that young people who found it difficult getting started in the workplace get a second chance .
 learn a who as future , , who started our our second have young education in . sure difficult secure chance society immediate to our access that a want generation that of get young to to the getting make continue challenge people found and workplace people transition it work world , to a the makes young successful is to To
 to learn young have to difficult continue our people transition that sure access To education workplace people a , immediate , who want that it our is started a in and a generation future the makes that second , the society of secure young getting found make our . who young work to world challenge to successful get chance as
 immediate get of that make access as work who young it that transition have , , sure a a successful young that society the our to started workplace . our who the , chance makes future getting is our To a challenge continue to to difficult want people secure second and found to learn to education generation in world young
All Canadians have a stake in meeting this challenge successfully. 
 a successfully have stake challenge in All meeting this Canadians .
 have this All Canadians challenge stake . successfully in a meeting
 Canadians have challenge this in stake meeting All successfully a .
 have in Canadians . challenge stake this meeting All successfully a
 . a challenge stake Canadians meeting this All have successfully in
 successfully challenge . in a stake meeting this have All Canadians
 have successfully challenge a meeting stake Canadians All . this in
 have meeting Canadians in successfully stake a . this challenge All
 a successfully have meeting challenge . All in stake this Canadians
 this . have a in meeting All stake Canadians successfully challenge
 All have meeting challenge this in successfully stake Canadians a .
 in stake this a meeting challenge successfully All Canadians . have
 Canadians in have successfully . stake meeting challenge All a this
 . challenge meeting stake All in this successfully have Canadians a
 have . stake All successfully this Canadians challenge in meeting a
 All successfully a Canadians have in meeting . challenge this stake
Fisheries and Oceans 
Negotiations on Multilateral Agreement on Investment-Continuation of Limit on Foreign Ownership of Commercial Licences-Government Position 
National Defence 
Search and Rescue Helicopter Replacement Program-Possible Cabinet Discussion on Awarding Contract for Helicopter Purchase-Government Position 
Search and Rescue Helicopter Replacement Program-State of Sea King Helicopter Fleet-Government Position 
Federal-Provincial Relations 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Atlantic Provinces Equal to Increase in Social Transfers-Government Position 
Delayed Answers to Oral Questions 
Human Resources Development 
Changes to Canada Pension Plan-Accountability and Transparency of Investment Board-Undertaking to Publish Quarterly Financial Statements-Government Position 
Changes to Canada Pension Plan-Investment Board Not Subject to Access to Information Act-Government Position 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
Commemoration of Fiftieth Anniversary-Plans of Government 
Activities planned around December 10, 1997 for the launch of the 50th Anniversary commemorative year of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) 
National Defence 
Lack of Helicopter for Number of Navy Frigates-Government Position 
Forestry 
Demolition of Government Laboratories-Possibility of Restoration of Funding-Government Position 
Answers to Order Paper Questions Tabled 
Energy-Department of the Environment-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
 All Canadians have stake in meeting this challenge successfully .
 in a have stake this meeting challenge . All Canadians
 in . Canadians meeting have successfully a stake challenge this
 stake successfully challenge . a in Canadians have this meeting
No single sector of society nor any one level of government has all the answers. 
 single has government of sector nor any . society level the one answers of No all
 has . society single nor of any the sector government level answers of one No all
 level nor sector of of the . society government all answers single No any one has
 any society No nor has single level sector of of the government all answers one .
 single No government one answers level nor society the any has all of sector . of
 of has of society answers level any government all the one nor single No sector .
 any of level of sector has nor . all society the No government one answers single
 government of . level of all one No single the nor society any has sector answers
 any single of sector level all one society has of . nor the government No answers
 . of has No society all of sector any level government the one answers nor single
 sector answers nor level of one the . any government has society No single of all
 nor of No answers all level has single . sector one any society government of the
 all any sector the one of answers single government of No society . nor level has
 society single of one government No level . nor answers the any of sector all has
 the sector all government has nor any . of answers of one single society level No
 one government nor all the of No has any sector level society answers of . single
It was not their fault; it was the fault of scientists. 
The cause, they say, was social behaviour. 
That is what caused the end of this pension plan. 
It is one other social plan gone astray. 
The good old days are gone.  
We have another problem. 
People live longer. 
Again, science has interfered with a social plan. 
Retiring at age 65, dropping dead three to six years later, depending on your gender, was good for governments. 
At its inception in 1965 - payments started on January 1, 1967 - in order to be eligible for CPP benefits, you had to be 68, and 68 was about the same year that the average male died. 
It was the perfect pension plan:
Pay all your lives, and then die just as the first cheque is put into the mail. 
If there was a postal strike, the government had the benefit of both worlds - the pensioner was dead and the cheque was in the mail.  
From the beginning, the CPP was simple, but it was misnamed. 
It was misnamed because it is also a life insurance program. 
However, it is a silly program when it is part of a pension plan.  
Instead of cancelling the benefit, there is an argument made as to whether it should be means tested when cancelled or not. 
That is an area where we can save a lot of money because, as people are dying today, cheques are going out in the mail, at $3,500 a shot. 
Yet we do not have enough money to pay proper pensions when people are alive.  
It is also a disability program. 
 No single sector of society nor any one of government has all the answers .
 one answers level the single society of of nor government sector has any . No
 any the one government has single of society sector answers nor No level of all
 has government No . answers sector any of society nor the all of one level
We must all contribute, each in our areas of competency, to meet the challenge we have set for ourselves. 
 contribute have ourselves the , , competency our We must we all to each in for areas challenge meet of . set
 areas to each in contribute have must competency of ourselves set all , the We , for . meet our we challenge
 set all meet of . our , must contribute have to for competency in we , each We challenge the ourselves areas
 meet the , in challenge of have to areas We all . for contribute must set ourselves each our competency we ,
 we meet must challenge ourselves . each , competency in have set to contribute of all We , the our for areas
 the set we competency areas each meet We of to in contribute , for our all ourselves . , challenge have must
 competency for challenge our meet contribute we all We in ourselves set , to each must , of have . the areas
 of competency have areas set our all to for , challenge , the ourselves we must . meet each in contribute We
 to contribute competency We in meet all have set . we must , of areas our each the for challenge , ourselves
 contribute , of in challenge . We we to have must our meet for the each , ourselves set all competency areas
 have the for each our must contribute all meet we competency , ourselves areas of , . set challenge to We in
 contribute We all we areas in . ourselves , challenge to each our must for competency of the have meet , set
 in , all for have to competency We we each must ourselves the our . challenge contribute of set areas meet ,
 meet contribute in We , the for , we have . to all set ourselves challenge our must of each areas competency
 we areas in contribute to . , ourselves for all We must set , meet challenge have our the of each competency
 ourselves areas , competency for to our , in set contribute challenge must the each . We we meet have of all
Recent Remarks of Prime Minister-Possible Conditions of Secession of Quebec-Government Position 
Hon. Pierre Claude Nolin :
Honourable senators, I would like to return to the matter of the Prime Minister's statement last weekend on Quebec's secession. 
He said in fact last week in Quebec City that he would be prepared to negotiate Quebec's separation, if certain conditions were met.  
I would first like to know what conditions the Prime Minister was referring to?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, the Government of Canada has always said that Quebecers would not be kept within Canada against their will. 
That being said, breaking up a country is not a step that one would take lightly. 
Senator Graham :
The will of Quebecers to leave must be clearly expressed. 
In addition, of course, any process that would lead to secession must respect the law.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
What does the law say on secession?  
Senator Graham :
The government has asked the Supreme Court of Canada to rule on the legality of unilateral secession.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
I had thought that Mr. Dion answered that question himself on the weekend when he said that a UDI would be illegal.  
Senator Nolin :
The Prime Minister has said he was prepared to negotiate. 
The Leader of the Government in the Senate has said the government is not prepared to negotiate.  
 We must all contribute , each in our areas of competency to meet the challenge we have set for ourselves .
 we the each in contribute have competency must meet areas all We ourselves challenge for set , of . , our
 must contribute the competency set meet to each all We challenge have for , we areas of in . ourselves ,
 ourselves our , must the challenge competency meet in set have contribute areas for . of to We we all each
The Government welcomes the action being taken by the private sector, through initiatives such as Career Edge and the Corporate Council on Youth in the Economy, and encourages the private sector to do more. 
 encourages the sector such more do welcomes Government and on The , Career the as private taken Council Corporate and , the the Edge sector being in to Youth . initiatives action by through Economy the private
 private encourages sector by through the taken Economy action and The Career and Corporate as Government sector , on the more being do Edge such Youth Council the welcomes the the initiatives in , private to .
 Council Government Career encourages , The Youth the as initiatives and welcomes to , taken private Corporate on by Edge sector private Economy sector . through the in the the do more being and action the such
 the Government and the private Corporate Career action encourages by the Edge through Council Youth to and , taken . the The being the as such sector sector do welcomes on in Economy initiatives , private more
 encourages the . Government the and welcomes being action the Edge as Council private more Corporate The in on the sector to Youth Career sector private do through Economy and taken initiatives by such the , ,
 taken private , on Career sector the through and encourages more welcomes do action the initiatives such Edge The the the Government being by and Economy Youth private . the in Corporate as , Council to sector
 Council and The on , being initiatives do through action private Economy more sector the Edge sector and welcomes taken the Youth the to , the private such in the . Government encourages Corporate as by Career
 . being sector private on action in welcomes do Career by the Council sector more initiatives the the , the Corporate Youth as and to Edge taken Economy through the Government and , The private such encourages
 as Economy Edge . on action private through the , Corporate and Council by the such in Government the the encourages being do initiatives to sector , Career Youth taken the and sector more private welcomes The
 Career Council through the Corporate and sector Edge sector Youth by to and private action do . The in taken Economy the more welcomes initiatives encourages the , , being private the such the as Government on
 such the through Council , the , to by Government private on and the . action Corporate sector and the private Economy the welcomes as do Career being more sector initiatives taken encourages in Youth Edge The
 Career Youth . through private Edge The welcomes taken on encourages Corporate , the being the as and , Economy in the the and Council initiatives action to by the sector more private sector Government do such
 the the Edge Economy sector Youth Career encourages such do and , , by Government private initiatives as more Corporate the in The private Council sector on through being taken welcomes to and . the the action
 Youth and private as Government by more sector welcomes , to the sector initiatives Economy encourages and The Council on in Corporate , action the the do the being through such Edge taken . private the Career
 and by , private welcomes sector sector The the being in on do Council . and action the Edge to initiatives private Youth such Government through the , Career the encourages Economy as more taken the Corporate
 Economy The the being as and such on private sector the . Corporate taken welcomes Career the to and the by sector initiatives private , Edge through Government Council Youth do more in , encourages action the
In this respect, the legislation must be clear. 
The board must first and foremost look after the interests of the contributors whose income security depends on its performance to a large extent.  
The history of the Quebec Caisse de dépôt et placement warrants examination in this regard. 
In the mid-1960s, at the time it was set up, Mr. Lesage, the Premier of Quebec at the time, described it as an instrument of social security. 
He added, at the instigation of some, that it would also be an instrument of economic development, with the result that, little by little, the managers who were not sufficiently dynamic in the eyes of the directors were replaced. 
It was not Mr. Caouette's money, it was real bucks. 
The second director was also an experienced investment fund manager, but the government changed in Quebec, and we ended up with people who were more dynamic and who wanted to direct the economy. 
That is when it was decided that the people running the Caisse were not dynamic enough and had to be replaced. 
That was done. 
That is how a deputy minister of finance came to be the president of the Caisse de dépôt et placement du Québec at a time when Finance Minister Parizeau was a very influential member of the Lévesque cabinet. 
This led Quebec industry leaders and other stakeholders to raise all sorts of questions about the policy and management of the Caisse under his direction.  
You know the arbitrary risks inherent in choosing the companies in which the board can invest. 
Of course, there are provisions to limit the ratio, but everyone knows that the percentage of shares required today to control a company is relatively small. 
Can you imagine what kind of arm-twisting this will lead to? 
To collectivize an operation is to politicize it. 
That is what we are doing here, notwithstanding the precaution taken to maintain the board members' independence from the government. 
Even if we are told that they will come from outside the government and operate at arm's length from the government, we must be realistic.  
I would now like to address an important aspect of the bill, namely the impact of the plan on the two pillars of income security mentioned by Senator Kirby. 
The 25 or 30 per cent amounting to $22 billion a year goes to old age pensions. 
Every year, we save $80 billion, or 10 per cent of the gross national product, which goes to income security, including $22 billion from old age pensions, $23 billion from the Canada pension fund and $30 billion or $35 billion from private pension plans. 
 The Government the action being taken by the private sector , through initiatives such as Career Edge and the Corporate Council on Youth in the Economy , and encourages the private sector to do more .
 encourages and , Corporate sector sector being Career do more the the the The , and Economy such Edge Youth the to Council taken as in private private Government through the on welcomes action by initiatives
 more Edge the in action and Corporate sector on to , Government initiatives by The the private such as through and encourages welcomes the Youth do Career sector private , being the Council the Economy taken
 Council action The in the sector Government Career and Edge taken as the through such . and welcomes the sector the on , Economy more being by Youth initiatives , the Corporate encourages private do private
The Government is committed to work with other governments, the private sector, communities and individual Canadians to help equip young people for the future.  
 future Canadians Government committed for the to The with individual equip other governments is . and communities , to people the help work young sector , private
 , help . is people The future with to private communities committed governments to individual equip , the Canadians other Government sector the and young work for
 for to the is young the individual private future Government work help to governments committed The , communities sector Canadians . people and , other equip with
 committed governments future private to . , and the work The equip to is for sector , young help Canadians communities with individual people other Government the
 the , the for with Canadians young committed . to future other help and communities work sector is equip individual The private people , governments to Government
 communities to The work future other and governments young , private equip sector for the committed Canadians with people to Government . , individual is help the
 with future to The is for people the , communities and committed individual help equip sector , governments . the other Government work to private young Canadians
 future private work , people equip the young sector is , The governments for to communities the individual . and to Government help Canadians with other committed
 , to people Canadians help other the work young , governments sector committed for The communities to the equip and with individual private Government future is .
 to people work private young and , is help to . equip for the governments with communities , The future sector Canadians individual the committed other Government
 individual to communities and , The other sector the work people Government is help governments the young with equip private , future . for to Canadians committed
 . Canadians to The people future young communities equip work , is help individual with committed sector and to Government governments private other the for the ,
 , The Government future communities to committed individual people young equip . other governments sector for is help , Canadians and private the the to work with
 with Canadians governments Government and help work . sector for future people private individual to , communities the , the other is The committed equip to young
 with help Canadians Government for the young communities equip governments work The , sector and is future people , committed individual the other private to . to
 and The governments sector with work is other . , Canadians equip people young , Government for the help future communities individual private the to to committed
The Standing Senate Committee on Energy, the Environment and Natural Resources has the honour to present its 
SECOND REPORT 
Respectfully submitted, 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this bill be read the third time?  
On motion of Senator Butts, bill placed on the Orders of the Day for third reading at the next sitting of the Senate.  
Income Tax Conventions Implementation Act, 1997 
Report of Committee 
Hon. Michael Kirby , Chairman of the Standing Senate Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce, presented the following report: 
Tuesday, December 9, 1997 
The Standing Senate Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce has the honour to present its 
SIXTH REPORT 
Your Committee, to which was referred the Bill C-10, Act to implement a convention between Canada and Sweden, a convention between Canada and the Republic of Kazakhstan, a convention between Canada and the Republic of Iceland and a convention between Canada and the Kingdom of Denmark for the avoidance of double taxation and the prevention of fiscal evasion with respect to taxes on income and to amend the Canada-Netherlands Income Tax Convention Act, 1986 and the Canada-United States Tax Convention Act, 1984, has examined the said Bill in obedience to its Order of Reference dated December 8, 1997, and now reports the same without amendment.  
Respectfully submitted, 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this bill be read the third time?  
On motion of Senator Kirby, bill placed on the Orders of the Day for third reading at the next sitting of the Senate.  
Present State and Future of Agriculture 
Report of Agriculture and Forestry Committee Tabled 
Hon. Leonard J. Gustafson :
 The Government is committed to work with other governments , the private sector , communities and individual Canadians to help equip young for the future .
 help committed future the is and to other , young people to , equip communities individual private work The Government . the sector for Canadians governments
 for other is committed , Government with young help future equip sector governments to communities the . The people to work private and Canadians , individual
 committed other work help , to equip young with for to governments Canadians private sector future individual . people the is the and , Government The
An important role for governments is to ensure the widest possible access to post-secondary education. 
 ensure role - An access important education is secondary to widest for post governments the to . possible
 post possible widest . important to access governments education role - for secondary is ensure the An to
 to important governments - for access ensure An post the widest role secondary education possible . to is
 widest - for is possible secondary to . An access important role ensure to governments the education post
 ensure post the role An access education to widest possible . secondary - important to is for governments
 widest An governments to education access the secondary possible post . role important - for is to ensure
 is education the ensure secondary possible governments important - to access An . to post widest role for
 education possible access An for post . governments to important widest secondary ensure the to - is role
 access possible to post important governments - to An secondary is the for . ensure role education widest
 post ensure to for education access the widest An possible is governments important . - to secondary role
 the education access widest role to for An important - secondary . is to governments possible post ensure
 . post is widest - ensure important governments possible An to for role access the education secondary to
 possible is ensure access governments to post the education to role secondary An - important widest for .
 governments role for possible the to secondary An widest education - access is important ensure to . post
 to widest . possible the to An role is access important ensure education secondary governments for post -
 access ensure important to the for is role post An - possible widest secondary . governments education to
What is the honourable senator's opinion on that?  
In this country, we have a totally isolated segment of society which is called "the mid-Canada corridor." 
Even in terms of communications, there is very little. 
What would the honourable senator do in the area of communication for those in isolated settlements regarding private pension plans? 
There are no words in Cree or michif for "private pension plan."  
I was a member of the working poor in 1965 and 1966 when this plan was put into force. 
I did not agree with the Canada Pension Plan. 
However, I will guarantee honourable senators right now that I totally agree with deductions being made, because now at least I have a pension.  
What will happen if this plan goes through is that the people in this country who really need it will get it. 
They have to travel 240 kilometres to the closest bank. 
Many do not speak English. 
What would you do in this case for these people who have nothing?  
Some Hon. Senators :
Hear, hear!  
Senator Stratton :
I thank the honourable senator for her question. 
It was an excellent question, and it is one that she should ask of the government. 
She should ask the government what they are doing to communicate the changes to our pension plan system as a whole.  
Senator Chalifoux :
I am asking you.  
 An important for governments is to ensure the widest possible access to post - secondary education .
 role widest important possible the post for . is secondary access governments to ensure An to -
 An governments post - . to access to role possible is for secondary the ensure education important
 important governments for role An post widest - to secondary education possible the to ensure access .
Canadians are concerned about the increasing cost of higher education, and the resulting debt burden on students. 
 on about are concerned resulting the of and increasing cost the education , higher Canadians debt burden . students
 cost increasing concerned the . about students debt education resulting on the are higher and burden , of Canadians
 cost burden are . Canadians , the higher increasing students the of about on resulting education debt concerned and
 burden on higher increasing the cost Canadians . and debt are the about concerned students resulting education , of
 education resulting the Canadians of , concerned the on about . debt cost are higher increasing and burden students
 are of the concerned cost debt Canadians . burden the students resulting increasing education , about higher and on
 burden resulting higher and . the cost concerned about on , the debt increasing students education Canadians are of
 on , of concerned increasing debt Canadians the about . the students higher education burden resulting cost and are
 are about resulting debt the Canadians education on , . students the cost concerned and higher increasing burden of
 about students cost and . debt the burden of concerned education on the are Canadians , increasing higher resulting
 the resulting students cost of the higher are about debt Canadians , concerned education . burden on increasing and
 of about resulting and debt on higher the students cost are the Canadians burden , increasing education . concerned
 Canadians on the education students of higher the increasing concerned resulting and about burden , . are debt cost
 concerned the higher , of on debt the burden increasing resulting are Canadians about and cost students education .
 are the the increasing Canadians resulting students cost about and debt of education , on higher burden . concerned
 about cost debt education higher and burden on increasing the students . concerned are of , resulting Canadians the
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, I am not sure what is the present position. 
I presume that my honourable friend is correct in his assumption, but I will have the matter clarified.  
Senator Comeau :
I might advise the minister that indeed there is a 49-per-cent limit on foreign ownership of licences. 
Unfortunately, almost nothing has been said by the negotiators as to how they will handle these extremely important issues that impact on all the coastal communities of Canada.  
As a supplementary, would the minister also advise whether the government negotiators have been consulting with the fishing industry on this subject? 
If so, what has been the government's position in relation to the fishing industry?  
Senator Graham :
The answer, honourable senators, is that they have been consulting with the fishing industry. 
I believe the position of the industry is exactly as suggested by my honourable friend. 
That is something else that I will have clarified for him.  
National Defence 
Search and Rescue Helicopter Replacement Program-Possible Cabinet Discussion on Awarding Contract for Helicopter Purchase-Government Position 
Hon. J. Michael Forrestall :
Honourable senators, did the cabinet consider the awarding of a contract for new search and rescue helicopters this morning? 
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, my honourable friend would be the first to recognize that it is not appropriate for me to comment on any discussions that took place in cabinet this morning. 
Hon. Lowell Murray :
Would it be appropriate for the honourable minister to let us know whether it was considered last week?  
 Canadians are concerned about the increasing of higher education , and the resulting debt burden on students .
 education burden the students about the concerned are cost debt increasing resulting of and on Canadians , .
 increasing of about resulting the debt concerned cost and on are higher the burden students . education Canadians
 are on . Canadians about students , the concerned of burden education higher the debt resulting and cost
The Government took some important measures to address this problem in its budget of February 1997. 
 in measures took important some of February The its 1997 address this problem . Government budget to
 address this budget measures to 1997 some in problem its Government took February The important . of
 budget measures The address February in 1997 Government of . its problem this some important took to
 some of . February this Government problem to address took 1997 important its The in budget measures
 some of budget Government . The February important measures this problem to took 1997 its in address
 to this its important took measures . The in Government problem February budget address some of 1997
 1997 to important February address in budget this took . Government its The of measures some problem
 The important problem 1997 Government its budget measures to of . took in address this February some
 budget address measures The . important its Government 1997 of some in February to problem this took
 1997 to February this . The in of measures Government address some important budget its problem took
 in address budget measures The Government of some problem February took 1997 to . this its important
 . 1997 budget Government important February to problem of took this some in address measures The its
 The some this . address measures problem its to February in 1997 of Government budget took important
 took address Government problem of . 1997 in to The budget this measures its February some important
 address . The to of Government budget important some problem 1997 its this February measures took in
 its in 1997 budget to took measures The problem . of February Government important address some this
Even though most Canadian adults were eligible to vote by 1920, there is a final chapter that looks at ways to make voting accessible to everyone, including people in all geographic locations and people with physical disabilities.  
A History of the Vote in Canada is meant to be an educational resource and a reminder to Canadians of the significance of the right to vote. 
This is in keeping with Elections Canada's 1993 mandate to educate voters about the democratic right to vote.  
While this book will appeal to historians, political scientists, university and high school teachers and students, it is hoped that it will also reach those who may have difficulty exercising their right to vote.  
As parliamentarians, honourable senators, it is our role to help promote this book and educate our fellow citizens on their rights as voters.  
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
Report of Committee 
Hon. Ron Ghitter , Chair of the Standing Senate Committee on Energy, the Environment and Natural Resources, presented the following report: 
Tuesday, December 9, 1997 
The Standing Senate Committee on Energy, the Environment and Natural Resources has the honour to present its 
SECOND REPORT 
Respectfully submitted, 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this bill be read the third time?  
On motion of Senator Butts, bill placed on the Orders of the Day for third reading at the next sitting of the Senate.  
Income Tax Conventions Implementation Act, 1997 
Report of Committee 
Hon. Michael Kirby , Chairman of the Standing Senate Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce, presented the following report: 
Tuesday, December 9, 1997 
The Standing Senate Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce has the honour to present its 
 The Government some important measures to address this problem in its budget of February 1997 .
 its problem 1997 . measures of important February address in to this Government some budget took
 February important its budget of problem in some took 1997 address to this . The Government
 budget address its The measures 1997 . in important this some to of February Government took
The Government will continue to reduce barriers to post-secondary education through further changes to the Canada Student Loans Program, increased assistance for students with dependents, and new scholarships to encourage excellence and to help low- and moderate-income Canadians attend university or college.  
 Canadians university students moderate scholarships Student to attend excellence for and will and to Government - further to through the to college help reduce Loans changes The continue or Program , barriers . to with increased income new encourage , secondary post education low Canada dependents and assistance - -
 to increased excellence and to students secondary income or attend barriers Loans reduce , - , post and Canada help the to - changes to dependents college will further moderate to through and The with . assistance Program for encourage Canadians scholarships - Student continue low Government new education university
 new Canadians to and university for post to with to excellence Loans low , education - through moderate to to The Government encourage the reduce income college continue - or Student increased students , scholarships further barriers changes Program attend dependents Canada secondary and assistance - . help and will
 will , to attend college changes . dependents and secondary Canadians Government to and new to university with education or , increased to Loans - continue help excellence the barriers - students for assistance post Student low income and further The through to encourage reduce scholarships Program - Canada moderate
 continue income will to to Canada reduce or , attend new for . , post barriers The increased education to university help - to excellence moderate low Program encourage Student through Loans further dependents Government secondary the college and and changes scholarships with students Canadians assistance - to and -
 income and assistance scholarships or The to to post reduce the will university college and - Program Loans increased encourage changes through with barriers and students to Canadians secondary help to to . low attend Canada for moderate dependents Student further continue , - education Government , - new excellence
 through income encourage secondary students college barriers to and Student Canada Government for or - Program scholarships to - reduce , further and increased post low assistance to the changes to . new education excellence Canadians - to moderate attend will help university dependents continue with , The and Loans
 to to Government students barriers Student Canada and and , Loans university income help low excellence to changes assistance Canadians - dependents to Program secondary scholarships . the moderate attend reduce will - post with - for The or and new encourage education through college to , increased continue further
 Canada to post Student continue dependents increased or Program income and The help further Loans secondary university for - to to to excellence assistance encourage will Government through to with college Canadians the reduce attend - students scholarships barriers education . new - changes and and , low moderate ,
 dependents post through to further new to , secondary with Program and The - barriers Canadians income Student low university Canada college the . Loans and reduce for Government encourage to attend to to and - will or , moderate help education continue assistance scholarships changes increased - excellence students
 continue new . attend to Program Loans further for , Canada help to to - education changes moderate low - will secondary through and reduce and to - income increased or barriers scholarships students with Student , Canadians college university and the assistance dependents to post encourage excellence Government The
 barriers continue - and for Canadians , education students moderate Government - - and The to income to to reduce college Canada with Student Program to or help further secondary new will attend and the university low changes scholarships Loans increased , . assistance excellence post encourage to dependents through
 to and and Program changes the university moderate or Loans income college low Student to Canadians students scholarships The excellence will attend post help to and new - - to further Canada dependents encourage increased for , with - education secondary through , Government barriers assistance continue . to reduce
 or - to to - and income to and post will the through Canada moderate students for Program to barriers Canadians Student college reduce The continue help , Loans new dependents further university and Government low . assistance scholarships - excellence education increased attend changes with , encourage to secondary
 dependents increased to Student to Canadians with and for - excellence college and . university new will low post , through Canada Loans changes , income moderate scholarships barriers Program - The help students continue to assistance secondary Government encourage attend reduce education - and to the to further or
 for continue Government . Student to - to to increased the , changes and university moderate - excellence education barriers and help new attend to - college will further post through secondary to Canadians with scholarships income Loans students and or Canada Program The encourage , low dependents reduce assistance
Hon. Lowell Murray :
Would it be appropriate for the honourable minister to let us know whether it was considered last week?  
Senator Graham :
The matter of the helicopters is under active consideration by the government.  
Cabinet met last Thursday. 
Senator Forrestall :
If that is the last cabinet meeting before the Christmas break, I gather we will not see any decision until sometime in the new year.  
Senator Graham :
If that is a question, I would hope my honourable friend is wrong, and that I am correct in saying that it is to be hoped that there will be a decision before the end of this year.  
Senator Forrestall :
Cabinet will meet again, then. 
I am pleased to hear that.  
Search and Rescue Helicopter Replacement Program-State of Sea King Helicopter Fleet-Government Position 
Hon. J. Michael Forrestall :
Where are the other six? 
Are they on ships at sea? 
We have 30 in the inventory.  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, the answer is yes, there are 30 helicopters in the inventory. 
As I indicated yesterday, 24 were cleared, and six remain to be inspected. 
 The Government will continue to reduce barriers to post - secondary education through further to the Canada Student Loans Program , increased assistance for students with dependents , and new scholarships to encourage excellence and to help low - and moderate - income Canadians attend university or college .
 dependents The to college excellence students secondary - increased post Student for through , scholarships - changes education - or continue help to barriers Program income reduce university moderate Canadians new to with attend Government further Canada and and assistance . the , to and Loans low will encourage
 The excellence to moderate to through - - Canada , - Canadians and increased with further Loans reduce scholarships new , for and attend education dependents the to Program changes Government to and help to post will income Student secondary barriers assistance low . or continue students college encourage
 dependents to and Government with through help new Loans and barriers - Canadians to for encourage - or to assistance Program will reduce excellence secondary low education college changes the university - students attend post Student continue scholarships to and income The . , to , moderate Canada further
The Government finds it unacceptable that thousands of jobs are going unfilled in high-growth sectors of our economy at the same time as young Canadians are unemployed. 
 as thousands Government young in same of the at unemployed sectors time of it The our going that unfilled jobs high - . growth are finds unacceptable Canadians economy are
 finds our are sectors - thousands that in . young of The unemployed high going jobs it same time economy Canadians as of growth unfilled at unacceptable are Government the
 growth as The - Canadians high young our going the . jobs time unfilled same are in unacceptable finds unemployed thousands it economy that at are sectors of Government of
 high Canadians as The of young Government are finds it unfilled same our unemployed going unacceptable growth the time in thousands sectors - that are economy . at jobs of
 in . are high unfilled finds at thousands - The Government unacceptable same economy the that going it Canadians time unemployed sectors are of young our growth as jobs of
 finds that as The Canadians going are unemployed young at high our same it of thousands Government - economy of are jobs . time growth in the unfilled unacceptable sectors
 Government going the it are finds growth of young as of Canadians high jobs economy thousands The in our that . unemployed time unacceptable - sectors unfilled are same at
 at sectors time unemployed . that of jobs - Canadians growth unacceptable young The the finds unfilled Government same economy are thousands in going of it are our as high
 finds unemployed sectors high Canadians as are are going in The young time - same growth Government jobs economy that thousands at . of unfilled of unacceptable our the it
 as finds time same . - are young Government sectors growth jobs unacceptable the high are Canadians thousands of in at of that economy our The it unfilled unemployed going
 The jobs unacceptable Canadians are finds our same growth as in . Government at unfilled high economy are sectors - thousands that of young going the it of unemployed time
 thousands Government unfilled time high of the of at jobs as sectors unacceptable our economy Canadians . it that going The are same young are in growth finds - unemployed
 economy of it young our The unemployed finds Government as sectors that in time unfilled thousands Canadians the of at are growth high same going - . unacceptable jobs are
 are The economy unemployed the sectors finds as going are unfilled unacceptable time it that thousands in growth . jobs - young Government of our at Canadians same high of
 at in jobs Canadians going are unemployed sectors the of growth it finds our . thousands high - young Government time economy The that of are same unacceptable as unfilled
 as in high jobs Government the our same time unacceptable going of finds of sectors young unemployed unfilled thousands . The are at that - economy it growth Canadians are
Activities planned around December 10, 1997 for the launch of the 50th Anniversary commemorative year of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) 
National Defence 
Lack of Helicopter for Number of Navy Frigates-Government Position 
(Response to question raised by Hon. J. Michael Forrestall on November 20, 1997) 
An eleventh detachment is required for Canada's full time commitment of one ship to NATO's Standing Naval Force Atlantic.  
Maritime Command employs a three-tiered approach to fleet readiness: ships fulfilling national commitments are at High Readiness; ships in refit or major maintenance periods are at Extended Readiness; and, the remainder of the fleet is at Normal Readiness. 
Ships at Normal or Extended Readiness do not normally require Sea King detachments to fulfill their operational role. 
As well, certain taskings such as sovereignty, coastal and fisheries patrols may not require a Sea King detachment. 
Therefore, ships can be deployed at sea and operationally ready for a mission without a Sea King detachment embarked.  
Forestry 
Demolition of Government Laboratories-Possibility of Restoration of Funding-Government Position 
(Response to question raised by Hon. Mira Spivak on November 20, 1997) 
In response to the federal government's Program Review, the Canadian Forest Service (CFS) underwent strategic restructuring to rationalize its operations and to reduce infrastructure costs in the interest of providing maximum funding to research within the context of a reduced operating budget. 
As a consequence, Petawawa National Forest Institute (PNFI) was identified as one of the several Natural Resources Canada (NRCan) operations to be closed as part of a redefined departmental initiative to refocus our Science and Technology (S&T) programs. 
These programs address issues of national and international significance and service our clients through stronger, more effective partnerships with the provinces, industry and other players in the forest sector. 
All the major programs from PNFI have been transferred to the five current CFS research Centres and accordingly the majority of basic research activities from PNFI are ongoing. 
Claims of expenditure for upgrades prior to decommissioning were in fact for operational maintenance, purchase of equipment and some site enhancements. 
With the closure of the site all research equipment and transportable assets relevant to ongoing program activities have been moved to other CFS research Centres with their respective researcher's programs.  
The final phase of deconstruction has been delayed twice in order to seek alternate tenants for the townsite. 
The site in its current state represents a safety risk both in terms of security and liability and requires significant annual expenditures for heating and infrastructure to simply be maintained.  
 The Government finds it unacceptable that thousands of jobs are going unfilled in high - growth sectors of our economy at the same time as young are unemployed .
 as same . are time - of the economy The unfilled young that Canadians unemployed finds our in it high sectors Government of going at growth are thousands unacceptable
 are our time that sectors of in are it as same Government high . growth finds going Canadians young unemployed unfilled The of unacceptable jobs at thousands the economy
 finds The the high thousands - of as are in same our at are of Government sectors unemployed Canadians that going jobs young unfilled it . time economy unacceptable
The Government will work with the provinces, universities and colleges, the high-tech industry and other rapidly growing sectors to better forecast the number and types of jobs that will be available and to develop a plan for ensuring that people are appropriately educated to fill them.  
 colleges tech will of , and provinces educated better that plan the The jobs to . a Government and and develop them other appropriately universities work forecast to industry - be for ensuring types with are number that growing , high the people available and fill sectors rapidly to the will
 other types that colleges . the people be to will tech and better work the and and them industry ensuring growing , and that are fill jobs , to for plan educated high develop provinces sectors The to with will rapidly a available universities the Government of forecast - number appropriately
 number sectors Government appropriately tech plan the jobs colleges to of - for and and will growing the work with high fill ensuring to are and develop types will available forecast The that rapidly people be to universities other educated , that the them better provinces . and , industry a
 them a will and provinces for are available people fill , and of - forecast industry colleges ensuring sectors number , educated appropriately develop high The that tech work types universities will the that the the Government and jobs plan to and with to better be rapidly growing . other to
 them and rapidly number to and plan - Government of the to the jobs tech colleges for better work and appropriately people . will high be industry are a and forecast ensuring educated , the that to The fill types that universities , other sectors will provinces develop with available growing
 and tech with , educated that work to the high provinces rapidly fill jobs Government The of develop them to available forecast that - will will plan better appropriately industry are a ensuring . growing the and to other sectors number types be the for people and , colleges and universities
 growing with are types appropriately people sectors tech and plan jobs - of other provinces them high fill will the to industry the universities better available and for a ensuring develop and be that will Government . , the colleges and to work , number The rapidly to educated that forecast
 - universities be educated types a are fill them of and The will the available to rapidly . to , work tech sectors will provinces the forecast Government plan people number growing with and develop industry ensuring that high colleges better appropriately other the and that and for , jobs to
 sectors types rapidly them and high will . to , the a ensuring better jobs - the available colleges that develop and universities other to work the for plan number be Government and fill with that appropriately forecast The tech people growing educated , and to provinces will of industry are
 , tech and rapidly to provinces high available be colleges and and people sectors the - types them jobs that fill with for The and ensuring growing the plan that will industry to to are Government develop will number educated work a , forecast of appropriately universities other . better the
 a plan educated and industry types growing to universities to and . the provinces tech better the are and high the fill jobs with be number sectors rapidly , other will , develop - will appropriately that and colleges ensuring that them available people work to The of forecast Government for
 will ensuring industry them The colleges appropriately work available a the Government for jobs to with the types develop growing provinces , better and rapidly are , and other that that . and educated forecast will the high of universities people to be - tech sectors and plan fill to number
 to - appropriately types that available Government , with provinces and plan that ensuring universities to The a jobs , forecast industry and to number people are the . for tech develop educated rapidly growing will work the fill high and other sectors colleges of them better be the will and
 colleges the people provinces be will jobs fill , - that number available to that to a Government them and . appropriately growing industry of sectors plan rapidly better universities high ensuring the types will develop educated to and the and forecast , and other tech with work The are for
 them and the forecast high Government tech The to jobs better provinces types rapidly are , of to and educated will available fill number be work and . the growing that to other plan develop sectors industry and , with that a people for ensuring colleges the appropriately - universities will
 The and provinces will are , will the the develop of better rapidly them , with forecast the be available work sectors colleges and and other a number ensuring jobs . to plan to and educated Government that to growing people types appropriately industry for high that fill universities - tech
Of course, but in this case it is everybody's money that is at stake, and not just private funds.  
That is why careful consideration must be given to this proposal for a new government structure. 
I am referring to the Investment Board.  
All the contributions will be invested by this so-called Investment Board. 
I would like to start by saying that in 10 years, we will have a government agency managing some $150 billion.  
Do you realize how much power these people will have? 
Every week, every Monday morning when these people arrive at work, they will find in front of them millions and millions of dollars that they will have to invest immediately. 
Three billion dollars is $3,000 million. 
Theoretically, this is $600 million a day. 
This has to be invested right away, it cannot wait until the afternoon.  
Do you think that the heavy machinery required for these operations will be efficient? 
Impossible, honourable senators. 
There will be lost efficiency, which means financial losses. 
Those who believe that "big brother" will be kinder than the community of specialists in the private sector are seriously wrong.  
Even for the private sector specializing in this type of operations, whether mutual funds, national brokerages, or trusts, when the volume exceeds $50 or $60 million, the performance ratio is not proportional to the volume of the funds being managed.  
Private enterprise is aware of that. 
It seems only the government is not.  
The huge monopoly to be created presents a very high risk of inefficiency, of bad investments, and therefore of poor performance. 
Why should everyone be obliged to contribute, to provide funds to a manager who may do a worse job than the person who actually owns those funds?  
If some are deemed to have not done a good job, they are replaced, something is done about it.  
 The Government work with the provinces , universities and colleges , the high - tech industry and other rapidly growing sectors to better forecast the number and types of jobs that will be available and to develop a plan for ensuring that people are appropriately educated to fill them .
 the to sectors . that and ensuring jobs Government will and the to develop universities rapidly be are better fill educated , and number available people tech - The growing with of will plan that and forecast industry types work for other provinces the a to appropriately high colleges ,
 for plan and types universities , number develop that sectors with high to people the and the will available forecast rapidly educated of tech provinces work to appropriately and the growing colleges other and that better are fill a - . be will to Government , jobs industry them ensuring
 be are growing that industry educated with and tech people for a jobs them appropriately and universities other , better Government sectors of rapidly to types work and forecast that plan the develop The the provinces high to , available number to - ensuring the and will colleges . fill
Three factors make a significant difference to young people getting started in the world of work - a good education, a chance at a first job, and a mentor to work with as they establish themselves. 
 make a in factors difference establish of Three work young mentor . to , as they good a - chance a significant with at first people started to a a themselves , the job education and world work getting
 the chance a at mentor make education work a a they . - first job of as Three significant to in , world establish , getting with and to young a good factors started difference people themselves a work
 to in good themselves , a at a to education the a getting first factors with and world people . they young work a started job a make significant Three chance establish work - of , as mentor difference
 , of Three good the young they with significant a job establish education chance themselves and a started - at , difference first world getting factors mentor work . people make to a in work to a a as
 work as of education good and . , started Three a job mentor world in to - factors they a a people young work to getting difference , a significant chance at first a with the themselves establish make
 a started significant make job the with in , . of first work and they establish to work factors getting people a , a difference to mentor Three a - as at good chance education themselves a young world
 chance to , work a people started and difference as education mentor establish , in a a job with getting they factors make - significant of the themselves a at to world work Three a young . good first
 people job significant work of work a young establish Three to . in a world mentor as education themselves getting chance with make a , and factors started difference they good to first a a , the at -
 at in getting they mentor a good - . , young factors with to a the and a , job themselves first make a Three work work chance to world difference education people significant of a establish started as
 establish - of a difference a factors good themselves a to getting as they with chance make first young work education work , Three and to people . , at started world in job the a mentor significant a
 establish people to education mentor chance in job good factors world the of to as - they at a young a Three difference themselves , work first significant getting work a make , and a a . started with
 first they , started chance - as young at getting of education factors good make significant themselves a work in a work to the , to people a Three establish with world a a mentor . and difference job
 started establish mentor work a , difference world work people young , education first good at they getting Three - a a a job themselves . to with chance make of significant in a as the and factors to
 , work they started as to young , a in a themselves good people chance mentor education - Three difference . factors getting work a significant of job world first establish make at a and to the a with
 of started people establish job a a at in young getting - mentor make and a difference work factors significant . with themselves to education world they chance work as a the , , good a first Three to
 a good make establish significant in . a - a to education a factors young the themselves job as work world at mentor first started to a , of difference Three chance they work getting , and people with
We must do what is right.  
This bill has important consequences for many of us, and more particularly, for our children and our grandchildren. 
Those people who are already retired and at the age of 65 will receive all their benefits. 
For those people who are in the middle and who will soon be retiring, it is not a big problem for them. 
They will have some reduced benefits and some increased costs. 
To those people who have been paying all their lives - that is, all the baby boomers who will begin to turn 50 - they will receive benefits and be faced with another 15 years of increased costs.  
I will tell you for whom this is important. 
I have a daughter who is 24 and a son who is 21. 
Many of you have children and grandchildren. 
The government is asking them to pay 9.9 per cent - I am sure it is 9.9 per cent because the minister wanted the number to be under the figure 10. That represents 10 per cent of their income, and it will increase with inflation. 
The $35,000 that they pay on today will inevitably be more tomorrow.  
As inflation eats away at it and the numbers rise, that number remains the same. 
This goes against everything we have ever done on this program since its inception in 1966. 
It stays the same. 
In 10 or 15 years, that $3,500 will be worth $1,500, $1,000, $500, depending on what government does and what happens to inflation.  
Senator Taylor :
Elect the Liberals and it will be high!  
Senator Tkachuk :
If we elect the Liberals, inflation will be high? 
We already know that! 
 Three factors make a significant difference to young people getting started in the world of work - a good education , a chance at a first job , and a mentor work with as they establish themselves .
 work as make factors a , to with in . good people a to a and the Three young chance a , at of getting they mentor establish job world significant - started first themselves education work a
 they make mentor establish at the good as Three work education significant - and , getting young started to difference factors chance a in first a of to world with , a work a people themselves a .
 as a they mentor establish job . a difference young chance a the - education and with at Three , people of to world work started a themselves to make factors a work in first , getting good
The Government will increase its resources devoted to helping youth to make a smooth and productive entry into the world of work. 
 and the of to Government a The resources to helping into make entry devoted smooth world its youth will productive . increase work
 entry youth to and the smooth . world work its resources productive make increase Government into devoted The will of helping to a
 . will to the The make smooth of Government and entry a helping into to world devoted increase work resources its youth productive
 . helping will youth work the increase into productive devoted of a make The entry to resources world smooth Government its and to
 resources will Government and . increase youth its make of The to into smooth productive helping world to the entry devoted work a
 to productive its The a of into will the . youth and to world entry helping increase work smooth make devoted Government resources
 The to Government entry devoted resources will . its world work into make to helping smooth youth of productive the and increase a
 its a the increase Government world to resources work of into productive devoted will youth entry helping smooth The make and . to
 resources a increase smooth to into to entry make world the youth of . work will helping The devoted productive Government and its
 the . resources entry helping The a world to of Government into make productive to its and will increase smooth youth work devoted
 helping . make will the world youth entry and to The productive into to devoted Government a work its smooth resources of increase
 into resources smooth work a Government make increase its helping to world productive . of will and The youth entry devoted to the
 a smooth . to helping of and to resources The productive work increase devoted make youth into world Government the will entry its
 youth productive to world work devoted and its resources The entry of Government . the smooth increase a to helping make will into
 entry work Government make resources and smooth helping devoted will increase to youth productive world of into . a its the The to
 will smooth productive to to entry devoted a resources of its Government work make youth and . world increase the into The helping
Notwithstanding the short time-frames allotted in our terms of reference and as referenced by Senator Lynch-Staunton, the committee clearly heard every viewpoint that people wished to express.  
I hear Senator Wood. 
I will deal with her concerns in a moment.  
While some individual groups did not give evidence, as pointed out by Senator Wood, I concluded that, having examined the materials from those groups, that their viewpoint was indeed expressed by others during the course of those hearings. 
I believe no viewpoint was excluded from our deliberations.  
The time frames in the hearings in no way diminished the committee's ability to obtain or weigh the evidence. 
The committee made a thorough investigation of that evidence. 
No point of view went unexamined, save for one raised by the Reform Party at the last minute, and I will deal with that later.  
Let me for a moment repeat what we heard. 
There was a unanimous resolution, save for two abstentions, from the Quebec assembly. 
We heard from the opposition in the assembly; the Quebec government itself; English and French school boards; Catholic, Protestant and other teachers' groups; archbishops of the Roman Catholic church and the Anglican archbishop of Quebec, which I will deal with later; minority groups including Jewish, Arab, non-Roman Catholic and other allophone groups; students groups, both English and French. 
All agreed that linguistic school boards, which were a direct consequence of this amendment, were desirable and progressive.  
There was some dissent. 
I will briefly touch on it, as did Senator Bolduc in his most insightful speech, especially with respect to the plight of certain French-speaking Protestants and certain English-speaking Catholics. 
There is no question at all that some in those groups feel detrimentally affected.  
Again, under the current Quebec law 109, the notwithstanding clauses had been included, both with respect to the Quebec Charter and the federal Charter of Rights and Freedoms, therefore allowing for denominational teaching to be continued in Quebec. 
How the Quebec government will ultimately continue to afford opportunities for denominational teaching is a much more difficult question to predict. 
However, it is clear to me, from all the evidence I heard and carefully cross-examined, that the majorities of the so-called minorities favoured this change. 
There appeared to be some exceptions at the outset that must be addressed.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
 The Government will increase its resources devoted helping youth to make a smooth and productive entry into the world of work .
 productive will work of to and The the devoted helping smooth world into a entry resources make increase its youth to .
 a productive devoted world into smooth . will work make The to of increase helping to and entry the resources Government its
 increase smooth make of devoted into will resources a the its . work entry world to helping youth Government productive The and
Internship programs have been particularly successful in helping young people get started. 
 started successful particularly programs young . in been get have helping people Internship
 Internship been get started programs particularly in have people . helping successful young
 young started particularly have get helping people been . in programs successful Internship
 started helping particularly get people programs . young been in have successful Internship
 started particularly young people Internship successful helping get programs in have . been
 young started in people get Internship successful have programs . been helping particularly
 helping young particularly . Internship get have people programs successful in started been
 Internship helping successful have particularly young been programs people . get in started
 helping . get programs Internship people particularly started young been have successful in
 . people programs started been particularly young have in Internship helping get successful
 get Internship successful particularly people in helping . programs young have been started
 particularly helping been people successful in get young programs . have started Internship
 started young programs get particularly Internship successful helping been people in have .
 programs helping been young successful people . have particularly in Internship get started
 helping programs young successful people Internship . get in been have started particularly
 started get helping people Internship programs . in have young successful been particularly
Energy-Department of Multiculturalism-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Energy-Department of Natural Resources-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Defence-Status of Clothe the Soldier Project 
Defence-Status of the Armoured Personnel Carrier Replacement Program 
Business of the Senate 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
Second Reading-Debate Continued 
Canada Cooperatives Bill 
First Reading 
Criminal Code 
Interpretation Act 
Bill to Amend-Second Reading-Motions in Amendment-Debate Adjourned to Await Ruling of Speaker 
Motion in Sub-Amendment 
Quebec 
Linguistic School Boards-Amendment to Section 93 of Constitution-Report of Special Joint Committee Adopted 
Quebec 
Linguistic School Boards-Motion to Amend Section 93 of Constitution-Debate Adjourned 
Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration 
Sixth Report of Committee Adopted 
Bill to Amend-First Reading 
 Internship programs have been particularly successful in young people get started .
 been particularly helping successful young in started people get programs . Internship
 young people . helping Internship been in particularly get programs have started
 particularly successful have helping young . been started people Internship in get
In partnership with provincial governments and the private sector, a Canada-wide mentorship program will be developed.  
 the and will , a Canada partnership sector mentorship governments with - . wide In be developed private provincial program
 wide with a Canada In mentorship be private , program sector will - partnership developed the provincial . governments and
 be a governments - the program partnership , with will Canada private provincial wide and sector developed . mentorship In
 and partnership In private be Canada a will the - . developed mentorship governments wide provincial sector with program ,
 the sector provincial . wide a developed private be mentorship - In , and Canada with will governments partnership program
 wide a In partnership the private developed provincial with Canada will . , mentorship be and sector governments - program
 sector , . with mentorship a partnership will governments private provincial program and wide - In be the developed Canada
 sector be will Canada provincial a , private the and wide mentorship . developed governments with In program partnership -
 partnership a Canada and governments with sector will developed the mentorship provincial private In wide . program , - be
 partnership Canada the developed - be program mentorship and provincial governments sector , wide In will . with a private
 Canada private provincial wide - and partnership program will sector developed the be mentorship . governments , a with In
 program a developed be In wide partnership governments , private the provincial . and mentorship with will - Canada sector
 Canada In provincial will , developed governments private be and a sector program mentorship the . partnership wide with -
 with the program will provincial be and developed - sector Canada a wide private . mentorship partnership governments In ,
 mentorship will , a private governments program partnership and provincial In sector wide . be - with the developed Canada
 and private a the sector provincial In will , wide program mentorship governments with . be - developed Canada partnership
Changes to Canada Pension Plan-Investment Board Not Subject to Access to Information Act-Government Position 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
Commemoration of Fiftieth Anniversary-Plans of Government 
Activities planned around December 10, 1997 for the launch of the 50th Anniversary commemorative year of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) 
National Defence 
Lack of Helicopter for Number of Navy Frigates-Government Position 
Forestry 
Demolition of Government Laboratories-Possibility of Restoration of Funding-Government Position 
Answers to Order Paper Questions Tabled 
Energy-Department of the Environment-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Energy-Department of Justice-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Energy-Department of Multiculturalism-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Energy-Department of Natural Resources-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Defence-Status of Clothe the Soldier Project 
Defence-Status of the Armoured Personnel Carrier Replacement Program 
Business of the Senate 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
Second Reading-Debate Continued 
Canada Cooperatives Bill 
First Reading 
 In partnership provincial governments and the private sector , a Canada - wide mentorship program will be developed .
 provincial Canada - private , a governments will partnership . sector mentorship be with developed the program In and
 will Canada partnership provincial be private developed In mentorship - , governments wide program and a . with sector
 , private be with sector . the governments developed a program wide - In will provincial Canada and mentorship
To help those young Canadians who need a second chance, the Government will develop and expand community-based programs for youth with the greatest difficulty making the transition to the world of work because of low education and skills. 
 low the and the second chance Government for a young and education To transition . will Canadians programs world develop making the skills greatest , work the of difficulty expand those based - help of because to community youth who need with
 the of . a - of transition because will making for skills the world To difficulty those expand community chance to need Canadians help education the with programs based and greatest who young , Government develop the low youth work and second
 community to because need . , the based a work difficulty To programs expand develop youth will with Government transition who education and the chance greatest of for low help of the - young Canadians the second skills world those making and
 - , to community need based making and difficulty work youth Government the second greatest the . Canadians the the develop of those world To who young of for education chance a will because and transition help low programs expand skills with
 because expand greatest based programs education world Canadians To making to chance need the and the the of for Government and community work will second . transition the develop low skills help with a difficulty of , - those youth who young
 education help , programs low because expand a of difficulty those Government world and the and of who to - youth young chance the the with . making based develop second work To need greatest the will skills community for transition Canadians
 youth to the help and and the skills need Canadians . because education chance of transition will , a the Government difficulty the making based To for of community programs greatest expand second develop - world those who work with young low
 programs To , a work greatest the of Government education and difficulty the . and those chance to the will community expand help based second of making with youth who need low transition Canadians the because young skills develop - for world
 who the To programs because with difficulty young of the and world help . making education the work for will based chance youth low and transition greatest expand the those Canadians need to - of Government , skills a second develop community
 young because will of with . help need second To programs for , community transition expand the skills world based to and a who difficulty making of Government and low those youth the - work greatest develop the education Canadians chance the
 expand those the greatest - with of help will . chance skills second the the education low , transition need a develop based making difficulty and Canadians Government world and for To of programs youth to young work because the community who
 a - To and who chance and with skills the the expand the making because programs help those greatest Government young community transition for the world Canadians of , of need to . develop will work education based difficulty second youth low
 for a the education low . transition those Government the world based with to greatest chance , need because young expand difficulty the second youth programs community help skills - of will Canadians who work the of To and develop and making
 world and programs work Government for education difficulty the the with Canadians making help young , youth who because will a second To those chance expand based . of develop the skills the transition of - need to greatest community and low
 difficulty help young of transition the for will . the a need world programs - Canadians work community because who Government education youth the develop , those of and and with To based low chance the second to skills making greatest expand
 because to of second difficulty the with expand of and who young youth those and world based education chance - , the making the community low To Canadians the programs develop will transition Government for help . skills need greatest work a
Then, honourable senators, came the more complicated problem alluded to by Senators Wood, Pitfield, Bolduc, Lavoie-Roux and Kirby and Lynch-Staunton, namely, how to determine whether or not, as defenders of the Constitution, we in the Senate could satisfy ourselves that there was a majority of the so-called "minorities" affected by any proposed diminution of their rights or privileges. 
All senators agree that one of our paramount duties in the Senate is to safeguard the Constitution and the rights of the minorities under that Constitution.  
I shall now turn to the essence of section 93, which is called by some commentators, a "Pocket Bill of Rights." 
That is a misnomer.  
In essence, section 93 is a series of privileges rather than full rights. 
Clearly, this is not the case here. 
Section 93 has yet another substantial problem which further diminished and minimized one's ability to define the subsections as containing full rights. 
On its face, these privileges, or limited rights, pertain only to the geography of the city of Montreal and Quebec City at the date of Confederation and beyond, into the province, to the privileges or rights of dissentient Roman Catholic and Protestant denominational school boards.  
Therefore, it is so difficult for me to understand how the subsections of 93 can be considered full rights. 
They could be considered privileges for geographically defined and certain narrowly cast denominational groups.  
Notwithstanding this difficulty, I still considered we had a responsibility to examine whether these groups, said to be affected by these privileges or narrow rights or attenuated rights, agreed with their substitution - not their diminishment or removal - for the architecture of denominational access now afforded under the provisions of Quebec educational laws. 
I say "substitution" because, while the constitutional provisions were being attenuated, denominational rights had previously been incorporated in the Quebec Education Bill 109 and its predecessors leading to that bill. 
There is a clear, overwhelming consensus for citizens in the province of Quebec to maintain a form, some form, of denominational teaching within their school system architecture.  
It is equally clear that there was an overwhelming consensus with few dissents throughout every segment of Quebec for renovating the Quebec school system into two linguistic streams, two linguistic boards, English and French. 
There is no question whatsoever in my mind, based on the evidence that I heard.  
Now we come to the more difficult question confronting members of the committee - to determine if there was a "majority" of the so-called "minorities" affected or given these denominational privileges.  
Even here, we had difficulty in definition. 
Notwithstanding that, we still treated that majority as if it were a minority.  
I will not repeat Senator Stewart's questions yesterday about section 93 and its limited scope, but I commend all students of the Constitution to examine section 93 and see how even the subsections of section 93, in so far as that section pertains to the province of Quebec, are much narrower in its scope than is clearly understood or debated in this Senate chamber. 
I will not go into that aspect of this debate. 
 To help those young Canadians who need a second chance , the Government will develop and expand community - based programs for youth with the greatest difficulty making the to the world of work because of low education and skills .
 those world the need youth for young of expand Canadians who community greatest chance , difficulty based and work and the second low with to the transition the Government skills - a will of programs develop To making education help because
 education to youth who difficulty and the help second chance the and will develop Canadians world the greatest based those To making - , expand of . work transition community of the young because skills Government for a programs low need
 To community second the work will . world greatest Government and Canadians based youth to and develop with programs for help difficulty need skills chance of the expand young transition because , who the those of - a education low making
These will include establishing multi-purpose Aboriginal youth centres that will provide targeted social and cultural support in addition to increasing work and learning opportunities for urban Aboriginal youth.  
 centres support opportunities establishing for learning urban multi Aboriginal and These youth targeted in include to cultural purpose work that - and will social provide addition increasing Aboriginal . youth will
 include purpose Aboriginal . addition that in and youth opportunities establishing will youth for increasing learning social work support will multi to centres provide urban and targeted These - Aboriginal cultural
 and addition will urban targeted - cultural centres establishing provide Aboriginal include . in to youth opportunities social purpose and These Aboriginal work that youth increasing multi support for will learning
 that Aboriginal in . addition These and - cultural support opportunities and purpose increasing for will learning establishing will youth include provide Aboriginal social centres urban work multi to targeted youth
 and to - These will purpose support for urban establishing Aboriginal youth will include Aboriginal social work multi in increasing centres addition youth targeted opportunities and that learning . cultural provide
 that for . cultural urban increasing opportunities provide to establishing and and work youth Aboriginal include learning youth centres will Aboriginal will social multi in purpose targeted These - support addition
 include that multi Aboriginal support will and These increasing youth to learning targeted work Aboriginal will and social urban purpose for opportunities centres provide youth cultural establishing . in - addition
 provide centres multi urban learning will support purpose addition to for will targeted cultural Aboriginal social and youth and - work youth increasing These that . include Aboriginal establishing in opportunities
 and social include for youth . opportunities that purpose work increasing will centres and Aboriginal provide to - learning urban in These youth addition support targeted Aboriginal multi will establishing cultural
 and cultural support will youth for in and learning purpose urban will addition include to Aboriginal youth establishing increasing centres that multi provide Aboriginal social - These . targeted opportunities work
 establishing learning urban cultural will and social in centres addition and youth for that Aboriginal Aboriginal These include work - support opportunities youth targeted provide purpose . will increasing to multi
 youth Aboriginal centres establishing support . provide social for will learning include targeted Aboriginal These increasing and and purpose to multi that opportunities addition youth in work will - urban cultural
 opportunities and addition establishing will will provide in that and Aboriginal work learning support cultural social increasing to include Aboriginal youth for targeted youth purpose - urban centres multi . These
 and will and multi These work urban Aboriginal social include increasing youth in Aboriginal that - provide youth centres establishing targeted to support cultural addition will for learning opportunities . purpose
 youth Aboriginal cultural that establishing and These learning urban increasing include will multi work purpose social addition for Aboriginal centres support - to will opportunities in and youth . provide targeted
 Aboriginal addition targeted establishing urban for will youth youth to - will . learning increasing include cultural social that work and purpose provide These centres support multi and opportunities Aboriginal in
On that basis, I do not think leave is necessary.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is leave granted?  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
He just felt it was not necessary.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Leave is granted.  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is it your pleasure, honourable senators, to adopt the motion?  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
Motion agreed to.  
The Senate 
Conduct of Business-Notice of Inquiry 
Hon. William M. Kelly :
Honourable senators, I give notice: 
That on Thursday next, December 11, 1997, I will call the attention of the Senate to the way in which the Senate conducts its business.  
QUESTION PERIOD 
 These will include establishing multi - purpose Aboriginal youth centres that will provide targeted social and cultural support in addition to increasing work and learning opportunities for urban Aboriginal .
 addition targeted These in youth social provide . multi will centres will - to support Aboriginal learning and opportunities urban and for work Aboriginal increasing youth purpose that include establishing
 and urban support will Aboriginal work social multi learning and opportunities . youth will cultural - youth targeted for centres that increasing Aboriginal purpose to These addition establishing in provide
 will social These targeted for establishing urban purpose work provide addition to increasing support multi include that in centres learning . youth and and - Aboriginal Aboriginal opportunities cultural will
The Government will continue to support efforts of individuals, communities and other governments to improve Canadians' capacity to learn throughout their lives.  
 learn other to efforts and to will Government their individuals . lives capacity improve governments of support communities ' The throughout continue , Canadians to
 capacity individuals their lives improve to of , . governments will ' to other throughout efforts communities The Government continue and to Canadians learn support
 lives learn Government . other governments , continue capacity communities The efforts of ' throughout improve individuals to support their to and to Canadians will
 individuals other support . lives their The learn Canadians governments capacity improve to will to of efforts continue ' throughout to , and communities Government
 governments individuals and continue of capacity ' to will to throughout lives , communities Canadians other support their to learn improve Government efforts . The
 will support Government Canadians improve . learn ' communities to continue The governments and of to individuals efforts other their throughout , capacity lives to
 to governments communities their Government , to to ' Canadians learn throughout individuals other improve capacity and lives will support of continue The efforts .
 to lives efforts and continue individuals learn throughout The support other will to their communities , Government ' of to . Canadians improve governments capacity
 capacity throughout Canadians continue communities to support of The . lives other will to Government to ' their learn governments and improve efforts , individuals
 continue The support throughout their governments other lives . to to of improve Government ' and individuals communities learn to Canadians , capacity efforts will
 continue to other communities to to their learn support efforts The and throughout improve individuals of lives Government . governments capacity , ' will Canadians
 Canadians ' , communities their and learn efforts to other capacity improve of lives governments throughout Government . to will continue individuals support to The
 . communities of will , efforts support continue to Canadians other capacity ' to throughout their lives individuals to Government learn and improve The governments
 will communities . their to support continue governments lives ' , improve other capacity to individuals of learn efforts Canadians throughout to The Government and
 . Government throughout continue capacity communities individuals ' to and other of Canadians improve lives efforts their support to learn will , to governments The
 their , governments . continue improve lives support learn will to The communities ' Government Canadians capacity of efforts to throughout and individuals other to
In it, Bishop Morissette repeats the assembly's approval for the establishment of linguistic school boards, but he also adds an important caveat which was only given passing mention in the report itself. 
The letter states: 
Our approval for changing the status of school boards has always been accompanied by one condition: that the denominational guarantees established in Bill 107 be maintained.  
The Anglican Bishop of Montreal, in a letter dated November 3, 1997, to the same minister, and included in the report as Appendix I, wrote as follows: 
...we...favour the creation of linguistic school boards and the establishment of a non-denominational educational system which respects the choice of parents to require that their children receive religious and moral education in conformity with their beliefs.  
We cannot afford to ignore these views, particularly as they coincide with those of many, parents in particular, who testified before the committee. 
Linguistic schools are quite acceptable, we heard repeatedly, as long as the present religious component is maintained.  
Franco-Protestants and English Catholics were particularly concerned. 
While numerically they may not be impressive to others, surely they must be to the Parliament of Canada, the guardian of minority rights. 
Surely, the Parliament of Canada cannot subscribe to the notion that the rights of minorities can be altered, much less obliterated, by a decision of a majority when, at best, that majority may have a detached interest in the concerns and preoccupations of the minority.  
Some assurances may be found in a statement made by the Quebec Department of Education in a advertising supplement which appeared in The Gazette of Montreal on November 29. 
It is headed: "Confessional Schools and Services." 
I will read the two pertinent paragraphs. 
This is the official Quebec policy, from the Department of Education, on confessional schools and services under the new linguistic board system. 
It states: 
The change from religion-based to language-based school boards does not mean that all Québec schools will become secular. 
Each institution will have the option of maintaining or reviewing its current status as a Catholic or Protestant school. 
Students will continue to take religion courses or to receive pastoral animation or religious care and guidance services if they so desire.  
Before the end of the third year after the linguistic school boards are in place, the schools will be asked to consult the parents and decide whether or not they wish to maintain their confessional status.  
Those unfamiliar with Catholic and Protestant school boards in Montreal and Quebec City should know that in many cases, particularly in the Protestant system, it is the language of instruction which predominates. 
 The Government will continue to support efforts of individuals , communities and other governments to improve Canadians ' to learn throughout their lives .
 efforts of lives Government communities will , . their and to capacity The individuals continue ' to to Canadians support governments other improve throughout
 The Government . their ' governments improve support learn capacity will to to to communities continue other throughout and individuals , of lives Canadians
 individuals their efforts continue will to of support communities governments other improve to capacity . ' The Government to Canadians throughout , lives learn
Investing in Knowledge and Creativity 
 in Investing and Creativity Knowledge
 and Knowledge in Investing Creativity
 Knowledge and in Investing Creativity
 in Knowledge Investing and Creativity
 Investing and Knowledge in Creativity
 and Knowledge Investing in Creativity
 Investing and Knowledge Creativity in
 Investing and Knowledge Creativity in
 Knowledge Investing and Creativity in
 and Knowledge Investing Creativity in
 and Investing Creativity Knowledge in
 Creativity Knowledge in Investing and
 Investing in Creativity and Knowledge
 in Investing Creativity and Knowledge
 Creativity Knowledge and in Investing
 Knowledge and in Creativity Investing
You cannot do that immediately. 
One needs only consider the situation of Chile. 
Chile is a long, skinny country on the west coast of South America, and I really do believe they have a communications problem there as severe as ours. 
I told honourable senators the story of the finance minister in Chile, going on television every three weeks to a month, and breaking down the new plan into segments, talking to the people, because they all have television, and communicating in that fashion. 
That was the government's way of dealing with it in Chile. 
The only way to communicate is eyeball to eyeball. 
You have to get out and talk to people in their backyards. 
There is no great hurry for this bill to get through, at least not to the degree that you could not do that. 
Why not insist that your government take our committee out there to talk to your people?  
Senator Chalifoux :
We talked to the Conservative government about that for many years and nothing was done.  
Senator Comeau :
We are not in power now. 
You should push your people.  
On motion of Senator Gigantès, debate adjourned.  
Canada Cooperatives Bill 
First Reading 
The Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C-5, respecting cooperatives.  
Bill read first time.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
 in Knowledge and Creativity
 Knowledge Creativity in and
 Investing and Creativity in
 Investing Creativity in and
The revolution in the knowledge and information economy is transforming all sectors of the economy from primary resources to service industries. 
 is to industries from all The information revolution the sectors economy economy of primary . transforming resources the service knowledge in and
 transforming . economy information sectors from all economy the service in of and resources the to The revolution knowledge is primary industries
 economy in sectors information all is from transforming service revolution . industries primary of resources The the and the economy knowledge to
 knowledge The sectors of economy from resources primary service information the revolution and . industries transforming is all the to economy in
 economy all from sectors to the primary revolution resources the transforming and economy knowledge is information The service of industries in .
 revolution economy of primary all transforming the in and information is the The industries knowledge resources economy to . from sectors service
 the from in . economy resources knowledge and of all service primary is industries economy sectors The information the revolution to transforming
 from and . of to information service all is sectors resources the The revolution the transforming primary economy knowledge in economy industries
 knowledge . revolution transforming the to primary in of service The the information economy from is all economy industries resources sectors and
 and information primary The service knowledge resources . all to from economy sectors in transforming of the revolution industries is economy the
 sectors resources the is The of economy transforming information to service primary knowledge economy all in and revolution . from industries the
 in from information service all is . transforming revolution knowledge The industries the economy to the sectors primary resources of economy and
 knowledge economy transforming to economy the revolution and in from is sectors . resources industries service primary all of the The information
 revolution service all The knowledge sectors industries . to in the resources is primary from the of transforming economy economy information and
 the industries economy sectors is The economy primary of . resources to transforming knowledge revolution information and from the all in service
 all information in primary economy sectors the transforming economy resources from of the revolution to . knowledge is service The industries and
I truly appreciate all the support I have received from my colleagues regarding this subject. 
Thanks to all of you.  
History of the Vote in Canada 
Book Launched by Governor General 
Hon. Mabel M. DeWare :
Honourable senators, yesterday, the Right Honourable Romeo LeBlanc, Governor General of Canada, launched an important new book, A History of the Vote in Canada , which recounts how the right to vote has evolved over the past 250 years. 
The book starts at the time of the first elected legislatures in what is now Canada and ends with the most recent federal election. 
It traces changes in voting eligibility, electioneering and voting practices, as well as voter turnout since Confederation. 
Extension of the vote to those who were excluded legally from the franchise, such as women, aboriginal people, religious and racial minorities, is examined in the social context of the period.  
Even though most Canadian adults were eligible to vote by 1920, there is a final chapter that looks at ways to make voting accessible to everyone, including people in all geographic locations and people with physical disabilities.  
A History of the Vote in Canada is meant to be an educational resource and a reminder to Canadians of the significance of the right to vote. 
This is in keeping with Elections Canada's 1993 mandate to educate voters about the democratic right to vote.  
While this book will appeal to historians, political scientists, university and high school teachers and students, it is hoped that it will also reach those who may have difficulty exercising their right to vote.  
As parliamentarians, honourable senators, it is our role to help promote this book and educate our fellow citizens on their rights as voters.  
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
Report of Committee 
Hon. Ron Ghitter , Chair of the Standing Senate Committee on Energy, the Environment and Natural Resources, presented the following report: 
Tuesday, December 9, 1997 
The Standing Senate Committee on Energy, the Environment and Natural Resources has the honour to present its 
SECOND REPORT 
 The revolution in the knowledge and information economy is transforming all sectors the economy from primary resources to service industries .
 information revolution sectors resources and service is industries all economy from knowledge the economy the transforming in to . of The
 all primary revolution economy in from The knowledge of transforming sectors economy service and the resources to the information is .
 and all primary in economy . revolution resources the transforming is industries service to The from the information of knowledge economy
Canada is well-positioned to be a world leader in the global knowledge-based economy of the 21st century. 
 century global of be is . positioned knowledge world to economy - the in the - 21st leader well a Canada based
 Canada world positioned a 21st the is be well . - in - century knowledge based leader economy of global the to
 to in well leader the based is . a - global the Canada be economy - positioned 21st of knowledge century world
 century the to world of the in is well 21st Canada global economy knowledge - positioned - . leader based a be
 the global a based world economy knowledge well - - the in Canada positioned 21st to is century leader of be .
 century global - in Canada the the - based . well is world of a leader knowledge economy be positioned to 21st
 21st be a leader global - century of world knowledge in economy is Canada well the the to positioned - based .
 to is - positioned . world leader economy be - well based a the in century knowledge Canada the of 21st global
 Canada a global in well be - knowledge of economy 21st - the based . world century the leader positioned is to
 of positioned world based in knowledge economy century . leader well is the 21st Canada to - be the a - global
 . - the well based Canada is the leader to world 21st of global in economy be positioned century knowledge - a
 . leader - a 21st be - in Canada world based is well of global the to century the knowledge positioned economy
 . based Canada be in world well is positioned 21st a economy global knowledge - the the of century leader to -
 leader to 21st is Canada global in a well economy century world based knowledge the of be - the positioned - .
 is leader a . the economy of - knowledge world based - well Canada 21st to be the global positioned century in
 global 21st . in knowledge economy the leader the - is century positioned of Canada to world based - well be a
In the past, it harboured cheap loans for provinces, and it will harbour a $100-billion fund that will grow to a $1-trillion fund. 
Honourable senators, we will not need to pay the price. 
We will be long gone before the young people who starting out now, and who expect a pension plan when they grow old, will reap the benefits of what we sow today.  
Honourable senators on this side and honourable senators on the other side, I do not know why you would want to rush this bill. 
What is in it for you? 
What is in it for the Minister of Finance? 
What is in it for anyone to rush this bill through Parliament by December 19? 
No reasonable explanation has been given to me, and I am sure no reasonable explanation has been given to my honourable friends, other than the PMO, Mr. Goldenberg and Mr. Martin, telling you to pass this bill by December 19. 
They are telling you not to think about the consequences, because they are right. 
How do we know they are right? 
Why not take more time, honourable senators?  
Senator Gigantès :
Having listened to you, we know they are right.  
Senator Tkachuk :
Why not take the time - 
Senator Gigantès :
And the tedium?  
That is what we need to tell them at Christmas when we go home; not that we passed the bill.  
Hon. Roch Bolduc :
Honourable senators, I will not go back over the very important points raised by my colleague with respect to the intergenerational inequity in this bill. 
 Canada well - positioned to be a world leader in the global knowledge - based economy of the 21st century .
 century positioned a - global leader - be the the in world well of Canada economy based . 21st is knowledge
 the be - well - world global . of knowledge the 21st positioned to economy century leader a based in Canada
 century global - positioned the economy in leader to world Canada - is well . a knowledge be of 21st based
We have the talent, we have the resources, we have the technology, and we have the institutions.  
 institutions talent We have have the resources the , we have we and the , have . the , technology we
 the institutions talent , have , We , . we and the we have have have resources the we the technology
 , the have we we . have the and we , institutions have the We , the talent technology have resources
 talent have the , , we have the and . technology we the have institutions resources the We , we have
 , we , have resources , have have talent have institutions and we we the the . the the technology We
 the the have the , We we have we the , resources , technology have have we . talent institutions and
 we and have the have the have We we , have the talent , we the institutions , resources technology .
 we have we resources have , and technology we the the institutions , the the have . talent We have ,
 , talent , have technology the we have have and the we resources the We institutions . , we have the
 resources , we . have we and , the technology institutions talent the the we have have the , We have
 . we and , resources the , we the we , institutions have have We talent have technology have the the
 have , and We . have institutions resources the talent have we technology the we we the the , , have
 the have have the we the we , resources , . the talent technology we and institutions , have have We
 the have We have , the . have technology , the talent , we and we resources have the institutions we
 the have the talent we . have and we we have technology , resources , the the We have , institutions
 technology we institutions talent have We . the we , the the have have , we have resources the and ,
Hon. John B. Stewart :
Honourable senators, with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58(1)( a ), I move: 
That the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs have power to sit at 3:15 p.m. tomorrow, Wednesday, December 10, even though the Senate may then be sitting, and that rule 95(4) be suspended in relation thereto.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is leave granted, honourable senators?  
Hon. Noël A. Kinsella (Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition) :
Honourable senators, in the past two years or so, there has been a common understanding in this chamber that Wednesdays would constitute a short day. 
This is why we have been meeting at 1:30 p.m. The general understanding is that we try to finish our business in the chamber by about 3:30 p.m. 
In the past few weeks, we have heard requests like the one raised by the Honourable Senator Stewart. 
If the request speaks to a Tuesday or a Thursday, when we normally meet at 2 p.m. and sit a little longer, there would be no difficulty, all things being equal, in granting leave. 
However, I am having some difficulty in granting leave for a day when we are supposed to be having a short day in any event.  
I would ask the honourable Chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee if he would explain his motion in light of the fact that Wednesday is a short day.  
Senator Stewart :
Honourable senators, there are two points:
First, we are hoping tomorrow to have a timely assessment of the achievements of the APEC meetings.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Watch out for the pepper spray!  
Senator Stewart :
The second point relates to the request for permission to meet tomorrow at 3:15 p.m. although the Senate may be then sitting. 
If I felt secure in the prognosis that the Senate would rise at three o'clock - which is the assumption on which we base our start time of 1:30 p.m. - I certainly would not undertake to put forward this motion. 
 We have the talent , we have the resources , we have the technology and we have the institutions .
 , have institutions the we we , technology we . , resources talent and We the have the the have
 the resources have the the , have institutions we talent have We , we and we , the . technology
 talent technology the have . , have , , and we have the resources we the We institutions have we
By rising to the challenge of mobilizing our resources well, we can enable our citizens to succeed in the global knowledge-based economy. 
 the challenge resources our rising in succeed economy . of mobilizing to global our knowledge can By based - , enable well citizens to we the
 the global can based our resources succeed By rising we mobilizing to to - the well our . economy knowledge challenge of enable citizens , in
 the mobilizing knowledge the to based challenge economy of - well our By in resources rising global succeed we our . citizens , can to enable
 global succeed citizens in challenge rising resources to knowledge our the our to , can - of we the By . mobilizing based economy well enable
 citizens can the the challenge global to , based resources to we succeed . mobilizing well By - economy knowledge of enable in rising our our
 citizens the By global our succeed - challenge the our knowledge enable we rising can based to . to , well resources in mobilizing economy of
 knowledge . challenge enable our to global - mobilizing the , we resources rising succeed the By to in our can based economy well citizens of
 economy our By . knowledge the challenge we well the in enable global can , based resources to of rising our - mobilizing citizens succeed to
 By citizens the our to we . challenge of - , enable knowledge rising well to our succeed mobilizing in the global can economy resources based
 to well , By enable in of mobilizing to the challenge - . economy our succeed based knowledge we our resources can rising global the citizens
 global succeed can mobilizing rising knowledge challenge economy our , to well citizens to resources based our . - the enable the in By of we
 - knowledge the By resources in , our succeed well to mobilizing . rising to we enable can our the of citizens challenge based economy global
 , enable to our resources mobilizing citizens we challenge can in economy By our succeed based - to of the global rising well . the knowledge
 challenge citizens can knowledge enable in - succeed of , we resources mobilizing By economy well our the global to to . our the based rising
 the the to rising economy of enable succeed our to challenge knowledge - citizens mobilizing our . we , based By well resources global can in
 well our the By succeed , knowledge resources rising mobilizing economy global we to our enable the - of citizens to based can in challenge .
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) table the answer to Question No. 60 on the Order Paper-by Senator Forrestall.  
Defence-Status of the Armoured Personnel Carrier Replacement Program 
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) table the answer to Question No. 61 on the Order Paper-by Senator Forrestall.  
Business of the Senate 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, before I call Orders of the Day, I wish to remind honourable senators that we will be taking the official photograph of the Senate tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
Canada Pension Plan Investment Board Bill 
Second Reading-Debate Continued 
On the Order: 
Resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Kirby, seconded by the Honourable Senator Joyal, P.C., for the second reading of Bill C-2, to establish the Canada Pension Plan Investment Board and to amend the Canada Pension Plan and the Old Age Security Act and to make consequential amendments to other Acts.  
Hon. David Tkachuk :
However, there are a number of important issues that we believe are relevant and important not only to this side of the house but to all senators. 
Some senators, including me, are interested in this bill from a personal point of view as well. 
This bill was brought in last week so that we could work on it. 
Now, we must complete that work and pass the bill by Christmas. 
I do not think that we are handmaidens. 
We do not have to take orders. 
We must do what is right.  
This bill has important consequences for many of us, and more particularly, for our children and our grandchildren. 
 By rising to the challenge of mobilizing our resources well , we can enable our citizens to succeed in the global knowledge - based .
 our By - can our succeed , resources . of rising the enable well based challenge citizens in the economy to knowledge global mobilizing to
 the challenge . mobilizing knowledge , to resources in the citizens to based we succeed of well By can enable rising our global our economy
 well based the to - the global citizens our to in mobilizing , our knowledge challenge By enable rising . we of can succeed resources
This is how we will spur continuing job creation and sustained growth in our standard of living in the 21st century. 
 how standard . in century sustained continuing This 21st spur will creation and is living in growth our job of the we
 will the standard This and century job sustained continuing of spur our living creation . how growth is in we 21st in
 how century . standard our the living This spur continuing is we of in 21st job creation in sustained will growth and
 the our is . living standard creation we of century job growth continuing 21st spur will and in how sustained in This
 in . creation This spur 21st will is job standard living we and growth continuing sustained in the of how our century
 growth how will . living standard spur This we and in sustained continuing job in our century 21st of the creation is
 growth is our and how living creation in sustained continuing century standard in This the spur we 21st of will job .
 in living sustained in is will and spur we continuing standard growth creation job the 21st century . This our of how
 our the of standard and growth we in will 21st century This . sustained spur living continuing creation is job in how
 we and sustained of standard in creation our job growth is century living spur continuing 21st how in . the This will
 century our and spur This in we job standard how is creation in of the living sustained . will continuing 21st growth
 This the how sustained in our is and we spur growth continuing 21st . standard century in creation job living of will
 creation of growth sustained in This century and 21st living will spur how continuing the is our we . standard job in
 will and spur our is standard growth century living continuing of we how job . 21st in creation This the in sustained
 our and standard growth 21st in is we living how sustained continuing will creation of the century job This in . spur
 and 21st standard we living sustained creation is will our the spur job how in continuing in . of century This growth
Yes, the resolution is imperfect. 
We would like to have done it "our way," as Frank Sinatra used to say, but we must deal with the Province of Quebec in this case. 
We had to bend imperfect tools to see whether they fit our minimum requirements. 
In my view, they did not fit our minimum requirements; they fit our reasonable requirements for constitutional amendment.  
Senator Wood :
Is it not true in the letter from the bishops of Quebec - the letter the honourable senator read - that they were in favour of repealing section 93? 
They questioned linguistic rights and suggested that denominational guarantees established by 107 be maintained. 
There was a caveat there that my honourable friend forgot to read.  
Senator Grafstein :
I find myself in great difficulty defending Roman Catholic theology let alone letters from Roman Catholic archbishops. 
I will leave it to each senator to come to his or her own conclusion on the testimony and on the letters, which are appended to the report.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Honourable senators, Senator Grafstein is quite right in stating that reform is needed. 
Actually, reform is well under way in Quebec. 
The new system, it seems, will be in place for the next school year. 
New linguistic boards will be set up. 
There will be some difficulties, but, overall, it is proceeding quite well.  
What linkage is there between the new school system in Quebec and the request to exempt Quebec from certain obligations of section 93? 
I do not see any.  
Senator Grafstein :
 This is how will spur continuing job creation and sustained growth in our standard of living in the 21st century .
 in This we living spur in job the . century how creation our continuing 21st will growth of is sustained standard
 continuing standard the we century creation in in is sustained job growth living spur will 21st This of . how our
 how growth of . living and is standard we will continuing century 21st our the job This sustained spur in in
The Government is determined to do more to support innovation and risk-taking in Canada and to attract more foreign investment in knowledge-based industries to Canada. 
 and The more Canada do knowledge innovation Government industries is in foreign investment risk and attract to - in - support taking to Canada to based . determined more to
 knowledge investment determined Government do attract in and based innovation to Canada industries - is The - Canada and to foreign more to support more taking risk to in .
 more risk The Canada is Canada . innovation to industries in based do investment foreign support and - determined knowledge and in taking attract Government more to to to -
 and more . knowledge and to industries determined to innovation foreign risk is The in Canada taking in do attract to - Government - based support Canada investment to more
 . investment in support determined to Government risk and to The in to taking is Canada and - foreign do knowledge more industries more attract to Canada based - innovation
 Government more Canada to innovation and to more is . - industries attract and in to based taking risk investment foreign do to knowledge The in determined support - Canada
 taking based is attract The Canada more risk to foreign innovation . - to in to do investment support in industries and - and more Government Canada knowledge determined to
 risk taking knowledge - is The based and attract . investment to industries support to determined to to Canada Canada and more foreign Government in do - in more innovation
 more to determined support - in more industries taking Canada innovation foreign and do to investment knowledge . to attract - is The risk Government based to Canada in and
 Government more in - and attract is innovation industries do taking and to to in investment The to risk - determined to based foreign Canada more Canada . support knowledge
 in more - industries based in innovation more to to is taking - support . foreign determined to attract The investment risk do Canada and Canada to knowledge and Government
 The attract to innovation risk Canada in to support Government - - Canada to is based taking . do foreign investment industries more and determined in more knowledge to and
 - in do foreign risk based more innovation industries to to Canada The attract to determined in and and to knowledge is support more taking investment . Canada Government -
 foreign - to Canada . - support Government based risk more industries and in to Canada more to do and investment in taking to innovation determined attract is knowledge The
 more in do to The is based Government and taking determined industries knowledge in to to attract to innovation risk support foreign Canada Canada investment and - more . -
 to investment Government and Canada knowledge industries determined and attract . based - taking in in Canada is risk support do more foreign more to The innovation to - to
Again, science has interfered with a social plan. 
Retiring at age 65, dropping dead three to six years later, depending on your gender, was good for governments. 
At its inception in 1965 - payments started on January 1, 1967 - in order to be eligible for CPP benefits, you had to be 68, and 68 was about the same year that the average male died. 
It was the perfect pension plan:
Pay all your lives, and then die just as the first cheque is put into the mail. 
If there was a postal strike, the government had the benefit of both worlds - the pensioner was dead and the cheque was in the mail.  
From the beginning, the CPP was simple, but it was misnamed. 
It was misnamed because it is also a life insurance program. 
However, it is a silly program when it is part of a pension plan.  
Instead of cancelling the benefit, there is an argument made as to whether it should be means tested when cancelled or not. 
That is an area where we can save a lot of money because, as people are dying today, cheques are going out in the mail, at $3,500 a shot. 
Yet we do not have enough money to pay proper pensions when people are alive.  
It is also a disability program. 
There is nothing wrong with having a disability program, but it is part of the Canada Pension Plan now. 
It is part of a payroll tax to buy universal disability insurance, and then the social engineers took over.  
I want to give senators an historical perspective. 
There have been many amendments made over the years to the CPP. 
Yet, the government has said, "We will not touch that fund." 
However, they touched the other fund. 
Since 1973, they have been making new legislation and implementing new programs. 
 The Government is determined to do more to support innovation and risk - taking in Canada and to attract more foreign investment in knowledge - industries to Canada .
 - is and risk innovation . foreign taking and to determined Government do attract to industries to to Canada more - knowledge in The Canada in based support investment
 Government in taking is to foreign and - - attract based investment more determined to innovation The to knowledge do more Canada Canada in . to support risk and
 support and in determined knowledge - Government taking - do foreign Canada risk innovation attract more to Canada in more to The is investment and to to . industries
We will build creative partnerships between the private and public sectors to accelerate the adoption of innovative technologies in all sectors of the economy.  
 economy sectors innovative and the all creative private of of We partnerships will the between public build the adoption sectors technologies in . accelerate to
 in technologies sectors build creative private adoption will to between . accelerate of economy partnerships the innovative the sectors We the public of all and
 . We accelerate technologies the to build all private adoption of will sectors the the and public sectors innovative economy partnerships between in of creative
 innovative technologies between of to in economy partnerships We the will private accelerate sectors and all the public build creative . the sectors adoption of
 partnerships sectors technologies adoption sectors We the . economy private build accelerate and the to in of innovative all the public creative will between of
 the sectors the sectors accelerate the innovative public private technologies We in creative partnerships economy between build adoption of will . and of all to
 partnerships technologies and to build the the innovative We sectors economy public . in accelerate of the of between sectors creative will all adoption private
 creative economy . in of public of all private innovative technologies between the will sectors adoption the sectors and accelerate partnerships the We build to
 to sectors creative of innovative economy the between the all public partnerships accelerate . in We adoption sectors and private of the will technologies build
 . partnerships of build sectors public the all technologies in sectors the accelerate to will the adoption creative and innovative economy of between We private
 creative adoption of We partnerships public the of in the technologies accelerate innovative sectors between and . private the economy all build will to sectors
 and of build partnerships the private sectors accelerate in . adoption between of the creative to all public innovative will economy technologies the We sectors
 sectors all the and adoption economy technologies public creative between We of of . sectors accelerate in will build private to the partnerships the innovative
 and sectors will . the in the sectors accelerate between to of creative the public innovative We build all partnerships technologies of economy adoption private
 innovative . all of between the will build technologies in sectors We creative the to private public adoption sectors accelerate the and of partnerships economy
 the and of to build innovative private the partnerships the sectors sectors all . public creative economy will of We in between adoption accelerate technologies
The government is asking them to pay 9.9 per cent - I am sure it is 9.9 per cent because the minister wanted the number to be under the figure 10. That represents 10 per cent of their income, and it will increase with inflation. 
The $35,000 that they pay on today will inevitably be more tomorrow.  
As inflation eats away at it and the numbers rise, that number remains the same. 
This goes against everything we have ever done on this program since its inception in 1966. 
It stays the same. 
In 10 or 15 years, that $3,500 will be worth $1,500, $1,000, $500, depending on what government does and what happens to inflation.  
Senator Taylor :
Elect the Liberals and it will be high!  
Senator Tkachuk :
If we elect the Liberals, inflation will be high? 
We already know that! 
Let me continue in that vein. 
Perhaps honourable senators opposite do not want to hear what Paul Martin will be doing, and the explaining that you will have to do back home in 10 or 15 years when your children ask you what you did about this bill. 
When they retire, their CPP benefits will be worth about what they put in, plus 2.5 per cent.  
I do not get it. 
I do not understand why we are being asked to do that to our children, so that those who are retiring today can receive full benefits and those who are retiring soon can get their benefits. 
I do not get it. 
I will try to explain it today, and - I hope I can convince you.  
The CPP is part of a larger program that Paul Martin is introducing. 
Everything involves reform. 
 We will build creative partnerships the private and public sectors to accelerate the adoption of innovative technologies in all sectors of the economy .
 will creative the to private of public technologies partnerships of sectors the adoption We all and between . accelerate economy in build sectors innovative
 of sectors partnerships of the sectors between the adoption private accelerate public build will technologies to innovative economy We the in creative . and
 will the partnerships all economy innovative We . sectors accelerate of creative the public in of build between to the technologies private and adoption
In particular, the Government will significantly increase the resources allocated to helpsmall- and medium-sized businesses develop and commercialize new technology.  
 medium develop and particular commercialize Government businesses technology In and significantly - the helpsmall . will - allocated , to new increase sized the resources
 commercialize - resources to and sized the the . will increase - medium and Government new technology helpsmall In , develop particular allocated businesses significantly
 increase sized and commercialize resources new particular technology the helpsmall develop businesses allocated significantly Government and . medium In the will - - to ,
 helpsmall significantly and resources and Government technology - new . allocated the businesses to particular increase the - sized develop In , will medium commercialize
 sized commercialize . the particular increase will businesses to In and develop significantly the medium and allocated , resources helpsmall new - Government technology -
 will In - - develop commercialize allocated helpsmall significantly particular to Government new resources the . and medium and the technology , businesses sized increase
 significantly - and new helpsmall increase . - particular develop , allocated Government businesses to the and In medium commercialize will technology sized resources the
 increase to technology significantly helpsmall Government commercialize new - and and allocated will In the resources - sized . the , medium particular businesses develop
 the businesses the to and Government , new commercialize medium allocated increase - will significantly particular resources technology and . In sized helpsmall - develop
 to and allocated the . technology will , businesses the significantly particular and resources commercialize new - In helpsmall sized increase Government medium develop -
 In particular . medium - the and allocated will businesses new , technology develop the sized and - increase Government helpsmall significantly resources to commercialize
 . allocated new significantly sized helpsmall - businesses the technology and develop Government medium will In and - resources to , particular the commercialize increase
 sized , develop particular significantly the businesses to - new - allocated the and will helpsmall In increase and technology . commercialize medium resources Government
 significantly the medium Government particular new and will resources In helpsmall the commercialize . - - and , increase allocated develop businesses sized to technology
 new commercialize and increase . to develop resources businesses In - will medium Government and technology allocated particular sized the helpsmall significantly , - the
 - the commercialize and the sized significantly increase businesses will Government to , allocated technology . develop helpsmall In particular medium - resources new and
In theory, it is possible that this fund will become larger than the entire budget of the federal government in the years to come. 
Yet we are placing it in the hands of 12 people.  
Does the Honourable Senator Bolduc concur, as Senator Kirby did, that there should be some scrutiny by Senate and House of Commons committees whereby these 12 people who will be sitting on this board will be under a certain amount of scrutiny before they are placed in this lofty, powerful, very responsible position?  
Senator Bolduc :
Honourable senators, that is a very good question. 
There is one thing in the bill that is very acceptable. 
The Auditor General will be able to look at the management of the Investment Board.  
As a result, there will be some accountability in the form of an audit. 
According to Mr. Massé's report, there are 85 to 90 different government organizations. 
This is all very interesting, but none of them will have as much money as the one we are talking about. 
We are talking about an annual amount on the order of 15 per cent to 20 per cent of Canada's gross national product. 
It is an enormous amount. 
I therefore think there has to be some sort of accountability, and one of the ways to achieve that is for parliamentarians to be involved in drafting the Auditor General's report; in my view, there should be an amendment along these lines, to guarantee that that is the case.  
Hon. Jerahmiel S. Grafstein :
Honourable senators, I have a brief question for Senator Bolduc. 
I believe the Caisse de Dépôt is the most powerful pension fund in Canada. 
What accountability does that fund have to the Canadian public?  
Senator Bolduc :
It has not very much accountability to the Canadian public. 
This has been discussed many times in Quebec City and last year, for the first time, they appeared before a parliamentary committee. 
 In particular , the Government will significantly increase the resources allocated to helpsmall - medium - sized businesses develop and commercialize new technology .
 and resources In new - , will technology - . sized develop medium particular allocated and Government significantly increase businesses the helpsmall the to
 commercialize allocated and Government . - the In - technology medium significantly resources , helpsmall businesses develop the particular increase new and will to
 , the helpsmall particular significantly allocated and to In and Government will increase new resources develop sized . - businesses - medium the technology
The Government will explore innovative policies and measures that give particular attention to increasing opportunity for Canadians in rural communities. 
 particular and policies attention The . increasing give opportunity for innovative Canadians rural to communities will explore in measures Government that
 that to for Canadians particular will opportunity innovative attention and increasing explore in . Government rural communities give policies measures The
 measures and . Canadians for will The give opportunity increasing Government particular explore that to rural in innovative policies attention communities
 . innovative and measures will rural Government give opportunity policies The in attention Canadians explore increasing to for communities that particular
 innovative explore Government Canadians for . opportunity that rural increasing give in and The attention to communities policies measures will particular
 Government rural for increasing opportunity innovative . particular will measures Canadians give in attention and to communities explore that policies The
 innovative The give policies . explore attention rural particular communities for Government to and Canadians that increasing opportunity will measures in
 that communities explore particular rural Canadians in for Government policies and give The will attention increasing innovative . measures opportunity to
 in innovative opportunity policies . and particular rural attention measures Government that give explore increasing Canadians communities The for to will
 rural increasing innovative in that explore and Government . opportunity communities give The policies attention measures to will particular for Canadians
 to increasing Government in and for measures policies rural that will particular opportunity Canadians The give attention communities explore innovative .
 give Government rural Canadians will in opportunity The that policies to innovative increasing particular for . measures explore attention communities and
 The increasing innovative for . will measures communities that attention Canadians rural Government explore particular and in policies to give opportunity
 that policies explore in Canadians increasing give to particular communities will innovative measures rural and for . attention opportunity Government The
 for The innovative attention Government Canadians increasing to that opportunity . and particular measures give in policies explore communities will rural
 measures to and will attention that opportunity explore for communities give increasing Government The in particular Canadians policies innovative . rural
They are increasing it by one month per year to give people time to adjust to the new reality of that retirement age. 
In effect, that will keep things in relative control.  
It should have been explained to Canadians that the government explored that method and rejected it for specific reasons. 
As others have said before me, people are living longer. 
While the age of 65 was formerly not achieved by many, it is being achieved by most today. 
That should be taken into consideration as a basis for increasing the age for retirement because it will decrease the burden on the young people who today believe that they will have to pay the whole shot for us.  
Senator Oliver continued: 
Honourable senators, in these times of slowing real incomes, increasing long-term interest rates, high personal taxes, increased CPP premiums, and ridiculously high EI premiums, where does the Leader of the Government believe that Canadians, who will receive less money from public plans, will find money to put away in their RRSPs to secure their own retirements?  
On November 6, Senator Oliver asked: 
Honourable senators, in 1995, the Department of Finance conducted a study on the impact of the increase in CPP premiums between 1986 and 1995. 
During that period, employee contributions rose from 1.85 per cent to 2.25 per cent of earnings, and the combined rate rose from 3.6 to 5 per cent.  
How many Canadians must pay the price for the planned increase in premiums?  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, I regret to interrupt the honourable senator, but his allotted time has expired.  
Senator Stratton :
I would like to finish my speech, if I may.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is leave granted for Honourable Senator Stratton to continue?  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
 The Government will explore innovative policies and measures that give particular attention to increasing opportunity for Canadians in communities .
 particular for Canadians policies give rural measures will The and . communities explore in innovative opportunity that attention Government to
 measures attention that for opportunity and Canadians communities rural particular policies to Government innovative increasing . give explore in will
 explore attention innovative to that The communities Government in measures rural policies increasing particular opportunity will give . Canadians and
It will adapt its programs to reflect the social and economic realities of rural Canada. 
 to the reflect economic It programs will Canada adapt realities rural and . social its of
 reflect Canada of realities economic the . its to programs rural It adapt and will social
 to social realities will of programs reflect and economic adapt . its Canada It the rural
 rural adapt to . realities economic programs social It Canada the and its will reflect of
 and of It its will . adapt the rural realities Canada social to programs reflect economic
 realities economic social will to programs reflect adapt of the its rural It . and Canada
 . rural economic Canada its adapt to will It reflect the realities of and social programs
 rural its adapt Canada reflect the will social programs and realities to It of . economic
 its and . the adapt programs realities It of reflect Canada will to social rural economic
 of the social It and reflect adapt economic . realities to programs its will rural Canada
 adapt will and social of realities its economic to programs rural . the It Canada reflect
 programs Canada and rural social realities reflect . will of the to its It adapt economic
 its rural social . adapt will of programs to economic realities the Canada reflect It and
 of to will economic Canada . realities the rural social programs adapt its It reflect and
 the and realities Canada social to of economic will rural . adapt its reflect programs It
 economic of will its programs rural adapt and social the Canada realities reflect to . It
Motion agreed to.  
International Assembly of French-Speaking Parliamentarians 
Meeting held in Luxembourg-Report of Canadian Section Tabled 
Hon. Pierre De Bané :
Honourable senators, pursuant to rule 23(6) of the Senate, I have the honour to present, in both official languages, the reports of the Canadian section of the International Assembly of French-Speaking Parliamentarians as well as the financial report of the 23rd regular session of the IAFSP and its executive committee, held in Luxembourg from July 7 to July 10, 1997.  
Foreign Affairs 
Committee Authorized to Meet During Sitting of the Senate 
Hon. John B. Stewart :
Honourable senators, with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58(1)( a ), I move: 
That the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs have power to sit at 3:15 p.m. tomorrow, Wednesday, December 10, even though the Senate may then be sitting, and that rule 95(4) be suspended in relation thereto.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is leave granted, honourable senators?  
Hon. Noël A. Kinsella (Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition) :
Honourable senators, in the past two years or so, there has been a common understanding in this chamber that Wednesdays would constitute a short day. 
This is why we have been meeting at 1:30 p.m. The general understanding is that we try to finish our business in the chamber by about 3:30 p.m. 
In the past few weeks, we have heard requests like the one raised by the Honourable Senator Stewart. 
If the request speaks to a Tuesday or a Thursday, when we normally meet at 2 p.m. and sit a little longer, there would be no difficulty, all things being equal, in granting leave. 
However, I am having some difficulty in granting leave for a day when we are supposed to be having a short day in any event.  
I would ask the honourable Chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee if he would explain his motion in light of the fact that Wednesday is a short day.  
Senator Stewart :
 will adapt its programs to reflect the social and economic realities of rural Canada .
 its will social economic the reflect and realities programs rural of . adapt Canada It
 of social realities programs It Canada . rural reflect the economic will its and adapt
 . social programs rural to and adapt its will reflect economic realities the Canada of
Further, the Government will redouble its efforts to ensure that rural communities and all regions of Canada share in the economic benefits of the global knowledge-based economy.  
 of to Government and the the the that benefits - rural its efforts in of redouble knowledge regions economy all will economic based share communities . ensure Further Canada , global
 the the rural to knowledge that efforts - regions communities redouble benefits of and in the economic share based Government economy , of will Further ensure . Canada all its global
 the economic Further will global redouble rural its benefits of knowledge communities regions of that the and all share in the , ensure Canada to based - Government . efforts economy
 Government and economy rural based ensure benefits efforts Canada of the to - the in economic share regions that of global communities redouble the Further , its will . all knowledge
 - benefits communities its the rural regions all efforts the . redouble , to Canada Government the Further and global of share of that ensure in economic based will economy knowledge
 of . benefits share knowledge the based in rural Government will to Canada redouble ensure efforts economy the Further communities of and its regions that , global economic the - all
 the the Government based in will ensure all to , regions that . rural redouble Further economic benefits Canada and the of share - communities knowledge economy global its of efforts
 economy of . efforts communities of benefits knowledge Further , ensure the the all and that in based redouble share will its economic to rural regions Canada global Government - the
 share . regions in Government of the global economy ensure - efforts Canada based all redouble of economic the its communities rural that , will the Further knowledge to and benefits
 all of . ensure economic redouble and the communities knowledge global share will regions rural to , its economy in efforts - the Canada based of Government that benefits Further the
 share the ensure will efforts and - . based in economy economic redouble Further knowledge to all rural benefits Canada Government its communities of of the regions that global the ,
 that to Further based economic of the benefits the Government rural and all redouble regions , - will ensure global economy knowledge . share its efforts communities of in the Canada
 all benefits to global economy ensure the Government will Canada rural Further - economic the the redouble , based of of its in and that knowledge . regions share efforts communities
 the , ensure of economy that will its - in to Canada communities redouble regions efforts the knowledge benefits and Government the all economic share of rural based . Further global
 Government . redouble and all to economic - share of its Further the will economy ensure that knowledge global the benefits efforts , rural in regions of based communities the Canada
 communities all share efforts benefits to , that redouble of based will ensure Government - regions Further rural knowledge Canada in economy . global the and economic the the its of
( c ) the Court is in effect coercing Parliament by threatening chaotic consequences respecting law enforcement and arrests if Parliament does not pass this bill."  
Hon. Orville H. Phillips :
Honourable senators, I had adjourned the debate but I understand Senator Wood wishes to speak.  
Hon. Dalia Wood :
Honourable senators, I rise to speak in support of Senator Cools's amendment. 
The amendment, described as a reasoned amendment, is a parliamentary device which allows a member to raise concerns and opposition to the principles of a bill. 
The public's emerging concern with judicial activism, particularly in the area of criminal law, is compelling our interest and study. 
An example of this concern may be found in a December letter to The Ottawa Citizen . 
We should be mindful of these growing questions and concerns.  
I commend Senator Cools for bringing this amendment forward at this time. 
She often acts as our conscience, and I, for one, would like to thank her for all the hard work she puts into researching the bills that come before us.  
Senator Phillips :
Honourable senators, I was rather reluctant to enter this debate because I do not have a legal mind. 
Then the thought occurred to me that most lawyers do not either - and that includes a number of them in this chamber.  
My interest in this subject was piqued by a newspaper article where a detective was complaining about the awkward situation he would be in if this bill passed. 
Formerly, if he was pursuing someone into an apartment building, he could go in under the provisions of a hot pursuit and arrest the individual. 
Now, if the person being pursued enters an apartment building, and there are 50 or 60 apartments in the building, the detective is worrying that when he goes to a judge to get a warrant, does he have to get a warrant for each of the apartments in the building, because he really does not know which one he is in.  
Two people said they saw Mr. Feeney drive Mr. Boyle's truck from the scene. 
The police followed a truck to Mr. Feeney's residence. 
They found the truck parked outside the trailer, with blood leading from the truck into the trailer. 
 Further , the Government will redouble its efforts to ensure that rural communities and all regions of Canada share in the economic benefits the global knowledge - based economy .
 ensure based efforts its economic benefits economy the - all the and to in knowledge global communities redouble rural that regions will of . share the of Government , Canada
 knowledge , in the of share its . of benefits Government economy Further the all rural ensure economic will regions the to efforts - that redouble based and global Canada
 the knowledge regions all the based Further communities benefits to global rural its economic of - redouble share in efforts , of will Canada ensure . Government economy that and
Governments have a crucial role to play in supporting science, technology, and the creation of knowledge. 
 supporting knowledge have and the Governments crucial of to in , science technology a role , . play creation
 to creation , Governments . crucial have of knowledge science , technology and supporting in role the play a
 have technology play . , knowledge Governments crucial role creation to science supporting the a in and , of
 and have a supporting . , to play creation knowledge role crucial of , science the technology in Governments
 role supporting have creation knowledge of , Governments play crucial to , the science technology a in . and
 , crucial have Governments supporting and knowledge , role in to creation play technology of a the . science
 supporting play the creation and role a of crucial knowledge , have science Governments to . , in technology
 of , science knowledge Governments supporting and in , role . a technology creation the have to play crucial
 have . science in of and role technology , , the play creation to supporting knowledge Governments crucial a
 crucial . supporting creation science the Governments have of technology role to play and a , knowledge in ,
 crucial , and knowledge the . in science creation to a role , of supporting Governments play have technology
 crucial , creation a . , to supporting play the Governments in knowledge and of have science technology role
 Governments and role a technology of , have creation in . to play supporting the , crucial science knowledge
 play and have crucial technology in role science to of knowledge a , creation Governments supporting the , .
 creation . and science of in , a have play knowledge Governments , technology role the crucial to supporting
 . and a supporting the Governments play science knowledge in , , to have creation of technology crucial role
Are you recommending that the fund be divided into four $25-billion portions and that so many firms administer each $25-billion portion in its entirety? 
Or are you recommending that one firm be responsible for one sector, such as the real estate sector and another firm be responsible for another sector?  
Senator Bolduc :
Honourable senators, in my opinion, it could be by sector, but my preference would be for the total to be broken down into four portions covering a variety of investments. 
Otherwise, if you have a block of $25 or $30 billion in real estate, you know what that means. 
Senator Meighen :
You mentioned decentralizing the decision-making process, did you not? 
Do you see any advantage to having decision-making centres such as the firm handling the $25-billion segment being located in different parts of the country?  
Senator Bolduc :
In Quebec, when the problem came up in connection with the pension plan in 1966, we insisted on having our own plan. 
I am not saying that this is how it should be across Canada; that is not my point. 
What I am saying is that, in Quebec, at the time, Jean Lesage had made it very clear that the fund was designed to provide social security. 
That is why we fought so hard for the Caisse de dépôt et placement at the time: to have this flexibility.  
I am not saying this practice should be generalized and extended to Ontario or any other province; it may cause problems I had not thought of so far. 
There is no doubt that it could be more difficult for some provinces. 
I do not exclude however the idea that provincial politicians could bring pressure to bear on this organization so that, when investments are made, people from each region benefit. 
To what extent will ethics and conflict of interest rules be overlooked? 
My experience tells me and I can tell you that it is going to be complicated.  
Hon. Terry Stratton :
Honourable senators, I should like participate in the debate on Bill C-2, the Canada Pension Plan.  
 Governments have a crucial role to play in supporting science , , and the creation of knowledge .
 , have a technology in creation supporting crucial to the play role and Governments knowledge . of science
 in , science play a of creation knowledge supporting role the to crucial and technology Governments have .
 , a the of creation in crucial supporting technology play science . Governments and , to knowledge role
The Government of Canada's endowment of the Canada Foundation for Innovation in partnership with the private sector, the provinces and universities, is helping to build a leading-edge national system of innovation. 
 s universities Foundation Canada to the sector , build - is national a of edge in , ' the endowment of system leading The innovation Government the for with of and . private helping partnership Canada Innovation provinces
 Foundation s of edge to for Canada of in a with ' and endowment innovation the the Government The sector Innovation build provinces the partnership national Canada , universities helping , leading is system - private . of
 leading the universities Foundation partnership innovation helping Canada edge endowment , ' s with for the to is of provinces build Innovation private - The system a national Canada in Government , of . and sector the of
 the and - endowment national . partnership ' Canada of , private Canada universities to helping for the with provinces innovation a edge of in system sector Government build , leading the The of s Innovation is Foundation
 and system universities Government build the national edge Foundation s partnership in Canada innovation the Canada Innovation to with The , sector - the is of , helping of a ' leading private of . provinces for endowment
 Foundation Government , innovation for private provinces Canada to s build and in helping the sector leading a of edge of endowment with ' - . system universities national is the The the of Innovation Canada partnership ,
 ' the build The Innovation with , the system sector for in to Government of Canada Foundation - edge provinces of national of a s leading the universities innovation helping . and endowment partnership Canada is private ,
 . a of leading the sector to with national innovation of Foundation the Government endowment system Canada edge helping in Canada and , the s partnership The - ' universities of private , for Innovation is provinces build
 sector of in - partnership private is The , and universities edge the innovation national Canada endowment the of a provinces leading s ' Canada . of , build the Foundation with Innovation Government to helping system for
 , Innovation . s Canada the the - ' Foundation and universities sector for with to helping of leading Canada is national innovation system partnership edge , The provinces Government the private of build a endowment of in
 the national of The with a partnership the and edge helping is leading . build , , of Canada universities - to in innovation Canada endowment of Government provinces for private Foundation sector the Innovation ' s system
 of national , Foundation for in a Canada leading sector universities Canada ' to partnership private is The - innovation edge the the and build the system Innovation helping endowment . provinces of with , s of Government
 to The - Innovation a Government , of s Canada of the edge sector Canada . the Foundation universities partnership with innovation private is for system provinces and national in leading endowment of the , ' build helping
 leading with the in a private the Innovation s The , provinces of system Foundation of Canada helping . national partnership universities ' , of to edge build Government and Canada the for innovation - is endowment sector
 s with universities innovation Foundation helping the Canada of partnership sector ' of Government a Canada . of private in , the leading endowment Innovation for - national provinces build is edge , system and to the The
 private leading provinces is The universities with the national partnership endowment the helping to - of ' Canada Canada system the a of s , in edge Government of and for , Foundation . sector build innovation Innovation
That is why it is essential that a constitutional amendment be thoroughly reviewed by the Senate, otherwise we will be party to the Commons always having its will on us.  
The following, taken from the joint committee report, was not included as an afterthought, I can assure honourable senators: 
Sixteen Members of the House of Commons, and seven Senators, were named to this Special Joint Committee. 
Some of those Senators have stated that their participation in the Committee must in no way be seen as absolving them, or their Senate colleagues, from the Senate's constitutional obligation to assess any amendment proposed to the Constitution of Canada.  
I am already hearing cries of alarm from those who will claim that the Senate, by adopting this attitude, will cause a delay which could compromise the reforms the Government of Quebec has in mind. 
I would like to remind those with such concerns that the reforms are already happening, are far advanced even, and do not need amendment of section 93 to reach their conclusion.  
The amendment to section 93 will do away with the confessional school boards and the dissentient boards only, and these will have to stay in place until the end of the current academic year early next summer.  
Hence the argument that it is essential for Parliament to make a decision before the end of the year has no justification.  
I hope that honourable senators will not be taken in by the specious argument that the sooner we approve the resolution, the more we will show how well the federation works. 
That is a sentiment which was trumpeted ad nauseum by government supporters following the adoption of the resolution in the other place. 
It is a sentiment which is certainly not shared by members of the Quebec government. 
Constitutional amendments affect all Canadians, even if their immediate impact is felt in only one region of the country. 
They must not be treated lightly, particularly as they affect minorities. 
The federation's value lies in this country's historic respect for the individuality of minorities and for their desire not to have this individuality crushed by the numerical weight of the majority.  
What we are being asked to do in the final analysis is remove constitutionally guaranteed rights, as discriminatory as they may be by today's standards, and entrust them to a province which will honour them for a given period, with no guarantee that they will be incorporated on a permanent basis. 
The National Assembly has endorsed this unanimously, as did most witnesses who stayed with the issue, with varying degrees of enthusiasm. 
Prominent legal experts even argued that various Supreme Court decisions have interpreted section 93 in such a way that it has lost much of its significance.  
All this may be true, but there are still Quebecers who feel that by adopting the resolution they will be abandoned by the very Parliament whose responsibility it is to protect them.  
I wish to end my remarks by quoting from an opinion which was given to the Quebec government by what is known as the Catholic Committee of the Education Council of the province of Quebec, a consultative body which is asked to give its views on issues affecting the Catholic religion in schools. 
This opinion was written and delivered following the hearings of the joint committee. 
 The Government of Canada ' s endowment of the Canada Foundation for Innovation in partnership with the private sector , the provinces universities , is helping to build a leading - edge national system of innovation .
 , sector build Government Foundation the s provinces of Innovation system the private partnership and endowment - a The with to ' of the for national helping . universities of innovation , is Canada Canada in leading
 helping , sector to , for the Canada national build The with leading of system . Innovation s is Foundation endowment - the and private in provinces of of partnership Canada ' the innovation universities edge a
 and private Canada . the innovation Innovation with edge Government The a build of helping Foundation , system national , of s the of ' universities sector to leading partnership the in Canada for endowment - provinces
All levels of government must do more to provide public support for research done in our universities.  
 research more in All government support . levels provide must of to our done for public universities do
 for must of . provide to do levels universities research public done more our government All support in
 support our done levels must All in of public more government . do for to provide research universities
 provide of to do public more government done support in must universities for levels research All our .
 All public of for more research in to levels support provide must . do done government our universities
 for provide must All . research done government do more universities public in levels of to our support
 for universities must research of government public . All more support to provide our in do done levels
 All done to provide our research of government support levels public in more . universities do for must
 our government for of do All levels provide universities public more to in research must support . done
 to provide more research public our All for must levels of universities government in . done do support
 research provide do All government done public more support to in must levels . of universities our for
 do provide must public levels . support our government universities done to more research for of in All
 to All more support public of must do . government levels our for research universities done provide in
 provide levels support must done All in do more of public universities . to research our government for
 of for government to levels All do more provide research done . must support our public in universities
 for government public levels . of to in All our support provide universities done do more research must
They did not oppose.  
The Anglican Archbishop, Archbishop Andrew S. Hutchison, said the following at paragraph 2 of his letter dated November 3: 
The amendments proposed to Article 93 by the Quebec government, which would remove the obligation for the Quebec government to have confessional school boards, seems reasonable to us and in keeping with traditional positions enunciated by the Anglican church.  
Honourable senators, the senior representatives of the mainstream Roman Catholic and Protestant groups did not register their opposition to these changes. 
This does not mean that this exercise was one of perfection. 
Indeed, many of us remain unhappy and regret the federal government's position taken with 23(1)( a ) then and now. 
I share, with Senator Pitfield and others, concern in that respect. 
However, unfortunately, I have a memory, and I recall very well that the 1982 Constitution, for which Senator Pitfield was a senior federal advisor, was a minimalist not a maximalist document. 
It was Senator Pitfield and others in power at the time who determined that, in order to pass the 1982 Constitution, the Province of Quebec should be given the option of proclaiming section 23(1)( a ) and that the notwithstanding clause would be incorporated in the 1982 Constitution to eviscerate the charter, both serious sources of our current distress.  
Many of us objected strenuously then, and do now, to giving the Province of Quebec these options. 
However, that is history. 
Many of us objected to the notwithstanding clause pressed by the other provinces, particularly Manitoba. 
Senator Pitfield was there. 
He understood that. 
This I remember.  
However flawed the 1982 Constitution was with regard to these two aspects, the special joint committee shared a defining moment. 
For the first time since 1982, two ministers from the Province of Quebec have appeared before a special joint committee of Parliament in Ottawa and have, in public hearings, given de facto and de jure recognition to the 1982 Constitution. 
Pluralism and the new demographics was the dialectic that we heard emanating from the Bloc members. 
They talked about pluralism - for the very first time. 
Surely, with patience, good ideas can have great roots and can grow great and mighty trees.  
 All levels of government must do more to provide public for research done in our universities .
 for to more support of All must research done do universities levels provide our government public in
 of All more to must levels . universities in for done government support do research public provide
 public government do universities for done . All support levels to our of provide must in research
Support for knowledge goes beyond support for university research. 
 goes . research support university beyond for for knowledge Support
 support . research knowledge Support university for for beyond goes
 knowledge . support university for beyond goes for research Support
 Support . beyond knowledge for research support goes for university
 beyond for Support knowledge . for support goes university research
 for knowledge university research beyond support for goes . Support
 for university for goes knowledge beyond Support support research .
 for university Support . for support beyond research knowledge goes
 university support knowledge beyond goes research for for . Support
 support for for knowledge . university goes beyond Support research
 goes beyond for research Support university support knowledge . for
 . knowledge goes for for beyond university support research Support
 goes support for Support university for knowledge . research beyond
 for goes knowledge support research university for Support beyond .
 research Support beyond for for goes . university support knowledge
 for beyond . knowledge goes support for research university Support
If the request speaks to a Tuesday or a Thursday, when we normally meet at 2 p.m. and sit a little longer, there would be no difficulty, all things being equal, in granting leave. 
However, I am having some difficulty in granting leave for a day when we are supposed to be having a short day in any event.  
I would ask the honourable Chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee if he would explain his motion in light of the fact that Wednesday is a short day.  
Senator Stewart :
Honourable senators, there are two points:
First, we are hoping tomorrow to have a timely assessment of the achievements of the APEC meetings.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Watch out for the pepper spray!  
Senator Stewart :
The second point relates to the request for permission to meet tomorrow at 3:15 p.m. although the Senate may be then sitting. 
If I felt secure in the prognosis that the Senate would rise at three o'clock - which is the assumption on which we base our start time of 1:30 p.m. - I certainly would not undertake to put forward this motion. 
However, past experience suggests that, notwithstanding the fact that we do meet on Wednesdays at 1:30 p.m., we often sit well beyond three o'clock. 
On one occasion we had witnesses waiting for upwards of an hour.  
Senator Kinsella :
Thank you, Senator Stewart.  
Perhaps I might address the Deputy Leader of the Government, then. 
By way of recapitulation, this issue is important for all honourable senators. 
A request for leave has been made by the Chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee to allow that committee to sit tomorrow, Wednesday, even though the Senate may then be sitting. 
The issue is that Wednesday, in our common understanding, was to be a short day to allow committees to sit on Wednesday afternoons.  
Not just today but at other times, Senator Stewart has brought to our attention the fact that committees operate on that assumption and arrange their business plans, only to be frustrated in executing their business plan by the Senate going way beyond 3:00 or 3:30 p.m. on Wednesday afternoons.  
 Support for goes beyond support for university research .
 beyond Support . university goes knowledge for support for
 knowledge for for university Support . beyond research goes
 knowledge . for university goes support research Support beyond
Increasing support for the arts makes it possible for Canadian culture to reach audiences at home and abroad. 
 for for at arts culture it . home makes support to abroad Canadian and audiences possible reach Increasing the
 makes to home at and for culture for reach abroad audiences . Canadian the possible support Increasing it arts
 for to and Increasing abroad audiences . for Canadian home arts reach at makes it culture support the possible
 audiences possible to arts Increasing at reach home abroad the for . for support it and makes Canadian culture
 Canadian makes Increasing the reach arts . to culture for and possible home for abroad support at audiences it
 reach to Increasing culture audiences support and for abroad home the Canadian makes arts . it possible at for
 audiences to Canadian for reach culture and possible Increasing support makes home abroad . it arts at the for
 it possible arts home support the and culture makes to Canadian for for at abroad . reach Increasing audiences
 audiences it the possible makes abroad to Increasing for home culture for at arts . reach Canadian and support
 to support and for Canadian reach Increasing possible makes . the arts audiences home it culture at for abroad
 audiences and abroad . possible it for culture to for makes home Increasing arts reach at the Canadian support
 home and at arts for support culture it makes abroad reach to audiences . for the Canadian Increasing possible
 support reach the at arts audiences Increasing possible abroad and Canadian it . makes culture home to for for
 and Increasing reach home Canadian at . for makes for to the it arts audiences abroad possible culture support
 makes Increasing home abroad reach . it arts the support audiences Canadian possible to at for culture for and
 at the possible home reach Increasing to Canadian culture it support makes arts and audiences abroad for . for
Since we did not get answers to certain questions, would you agree to invite the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs, who is the sponsor of this resolution, to appear before the Senate in committee of the whole? 
We would like him to give us certain assurances before we make a decision on this issue?  
Senator Robichaud :
Honourable senators, the minister who is the sponsor of the resolution has already appeared before the joint committee. 
He came at the beginning and at the end of the hearings, and my honourable colleague was there to ask him questions on the issues that were of concern to him.  
If the honourable senator did not get answers to all his questions, that is an entirely different matter. 
On motion of Senator Kinsella, for Senator Simard, debate adjourned.  
Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration 
Sixth Report of Committee Adopted 
The Senate proceeded to consideration of the sixth report of the Standing Committee on Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration (budgets for certain committees), presented in the Senate on December 4, 1997.  
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, I move, on behalf of Senator Rompkey, the adoption of this report.  
Motion agreed to and report adopted.  
Telecommunications Act Teleglobe Canada Reorganization and Divestiture Act 
Bill to Amend-First Reading 
The Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C-17, to amend the Telecommunications Act and the Teleglobe Canada Reorganization and Divestiture Act. 
Bill read first time.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this bill be read the second time?  
On motion of Senator Carstairs, bill placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading on Thursday, December 11, 1997.  
 Increasing support for the makes it possible for Canadian culture to reach audiences at home and abroad .
 support reach Increasing for and at audiences possible to makes for . culture home Canadian the arts abroad
 . Increasing culture the home Canadian abroad it at and for arts support reach to makes possible audiences
 . to the possible Increasing reach it for for at audiences support makes arts home and Canadian abroad
Our movies, books, magazines, plays, videos, music, and multimedia productions speak to us about our experiences at the same time as they present Canadian creativity to the world. 
 time Our world same about our to and as plays creativity productions the , the movies , us speak videos music . present , books to at , they magazines Canadian multimedia , experiences ,
 speak and , , . us time the at multimedia experiences , as to about Canadian the to Our books , magazines world videos same , movies productions plays creativity they , present our music
 Our , . magazines plays videos to about movies speak experiences and time productions the music , present our creativity multimedia , , books Canadian same to at , , us they as the world
 . multimedia present Canadian , to magazines movies productions our music the as us plays world , experiences speak creativity about at videos same time and they Our , , the , to books ,
 , videos to us , as world and Our the to , about , plays experiences present , speak at productions creativity movies time . books music , Canadian magazines our they multimedia same the
 , magazines the they world , movies multimedia creativity time music Canadian the , , same and our as videos present to productions . at , speak Our us , experiences about to plays books
 time same about plays , the Our , Canadian magazines . our they , the to world , experiences productions music books movies us at , and to multimedia present creativity , speak as videos
 creativity at same experiences books speak to as multimedia , and , productions . magazines our the movies the , world plays present , us time videos about music , they Our , Canadian to
 plays time , , music , , experiences Our speak us books present creativity the to about world movies to videos as the Canadian multimedia . and at same , , productions our magazines they
 about movies experiences videos magazines , Canadian time as , present multimedia the plays at Our , music us world same and creativity books to speak productions to our , , the they , .
 books speak , experiences our productions as and magazines time videos present world . movies , , at , , Our same about music Canadian multimedia to us , the plays the they to creativity
 , world Canadian about plays same the speak the , , to multimedia movies , as experiences at time to books our us . productions present music Our and they creativity , magazines , videos
 plays creativity time and multimedia about experiences our books the as , , speak present music , Canadian movies they , Our , videos magazines us . the productions , at to same to world
 multimedia to they our and experiences at music magazines , creativity to , speak books . , about movies same Canadian present as videos plays us , , Our the the world , productions time
 Our , , world and same , they creativity videos movies , productions experiences . magazines speak our multimedia , to the as us plays about music the at time to , Canadian books present
 the our , speak experiences the , videos . world magazines at time us , movies , , music same creativity present multimedia Canadian , and they to plays books as to Our productions about
Agreed.  
Motion agreed to.  
The Senate 
Conduct of Business-Notice of Inquiry 
Hon. William M. Kelly :
Honourable senators, I give notice: 
That on Thursday next, December 11, 1997, I will call the attention of the Senate to the way in which the Senate conducts its business.  
QUESTION PERIOD 
Federal-Provincial Relations 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Province of Quebec-Request for Particulars 
Hon. Fernand Roberge :
Honourable senators, my question follows the announcement made yesterday regarding the government's decision to set at $12.5 billion the cash floor for transfer payments made under the Canada health and social transfer (CHST). 
The government would have us believe that this amount represents an increase in health care payments. 
However, the figures indicate otherwise.  
The following year, in 1999-2000, they will only be $3.748 billion. 
Yet, the government claimed yesterday that it was implementing a stable transfer system. 
In fact, cash payments paid to Quebec for health and education will be reduced by over $300 million over a five-year period. 
Honourable senators, I remind you that these cuts are in addition to this year's reduction of $700 million compared to last year. 
Could the minister make inquiries and inform the Senate of the reasons why, in spite of a cash floor set at $12.5 billion, Quebec's share will diminish by $307 million over the next five years?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
 Our movies , books , magazines , plays , videos , music , and multimedia productions speak to us about our experiences at the same time as they present Canadian creativity to world .
 , videos time the at about , and the multimedia same to music plays productions books . , they us experiences , , magazines to Our present creativity Canadian speak , movies our world
 , as at Our plays music time about our the the magazines videos present world , . us creativity , movies multimedia to and Canadian , experiences , productions same books to they ,
 movies magazines speak us Canadian and Our productions music present creativity multimedia , , as at world videos the , the , our time to , to . same books about , plays they
Therefore, the Government of Canada will provide increased support to the Canada Council and will make special efforts to support culture at home and to promote trade in Canadian cultural and educational products and services abroad.  
 promote Therefore services will efforts and cultural will Council special and support educational in make to increased abroad and Government support . of Canada Canadian , Canada culture to trade home at provide the products and to the
 will efforts services and support educational . Canadian Council the in support culture Therefore will to home at products provide promote Government special abroad Canada make cultural of and the trade to to increased , Canada and and
 abroad cultural support provide products Government will . increased promote of at trade home and , Therefore to in Canadian to culture the will and support and Canada services to Canada make and educational Council efforts the special
 will and will increased support the culture and to . , products Canada trade promote provide to of efforts make Therefore Council abroad educational support Canada special to Canadian the and Government home in services cultural and at
 and Government make in and culture increased and Council and of , . special home Canadian Therefore to at to products support Canada will cultural abroad will trade to efforts services provide educational promote the Canada the support
 will Government make Council and Therefore provide in to . the promote and and cultural culture and at efforts the will to products to trade educational , Canadian special increased services of home support abroad Canada Canada support
 support to of will Therefore provide in cultural Canadian promote Council Government make products and and Canada abroad . culture , will efforts Canada at the educational to to special increased and home the support trade and services
 and Canada . will promote special home make products the will and support abroad to at increased Therefore to in and trade Canada efforts support the services Council cultural Government to and Canadian provide educational , culture of
 and efforts the to culture promote Canada . and increased in make will , Canada special Council Therefore cultural and Government products to will home trade the of at support services to Canadian provide support and educational abroad
 and increased home of to to educational make Canadian provide and and . culture to at Government abroad the will support services Canada Canada cultural efforts trade products Therefore promote support will and Council the , special in
 make will efforts cultural support at products to Government support Canada , educational the the abroad Council culture and in home services and will promote . provide trade Canadian to Canada and to and special of increased Therefore
 will of Therefore services educational make the Canadian Canada culture provide products support will and , support to home and and to Canada at trade the Government to cultural and abroad special in . increased promote efforts Council
 support the and increased promote products to and at Government to efforts of services educational special will , support culture in Canadian abroad cultural home make will Therefore to provide and the . Canada and Canada trade Council
 Government culture support abroad and Canada Council in will home will Therefore provide , . special promote at increased Canada products and cultural Canadian services make support of trade the educational the and to and to efforts to
 Council to Canada will educational Canadian trade provide products abroad to . Therefore efforts the cultural make support and in and to Canada and home of Government the services will culture at and increased special promote support ,
 cultural abroad efforts and to and make at the Council trade to . Government Canadian of home , special increased Therefore will the promote products and provide will culture in Canada and support Canada to services support educational
As far as business investment is concerned, will the populations of the provinces agree to have their savings used for businesses in other provinces at the expense of their own? 
Will the provincial governments be tempted to influence the investment board to serve their interests? 
A moment ago I said that when a government agency, a public office, is created, there is a risk of politicizing the process.  
Participation in business, with such enormous amounts, cannot be limited to a few major companies - the Canadian market is not all that big - but will also extend to a multitude of medium-sized businesses. 
The available funding will be sufficient to invest in hundreds of medium-sized businesses. 
In Quebec, for example, if I remember correctly from its last report, the Caisse de dépôt already invests in almost 800 Quebec businesses.  
Now, how are these 800 to be selected and monitored? 
There is likely to be arbitrariness and patronage.  
In addition, the Board will be everywhere and inevitably set conditions. 
Businesses will have to toe the line as the provinces do when Ottawa doles out conditional funding, as you may recall. 
This concentration of power, this centralization will be unhealthy. 
This technocracy and its perverse effects make me nervous. 
I hope one day we will have nothing worse than Mr. Sorros' manoeuvres to criticize.  
The regulations governing investments and the behaviour of administrators have not been revealed. 
They are not ready. 
What guidelines will there be for administrators? 
A parliamentary review is therefore vital before their implementation.  
In concluding, I would say to the government that the preferable alternative to its bill would be to simply oblige everyone in the labour force in Canada to invest a percentage of their savings in funds under private management or let government assume its role by providing a safety net for those who could not set aside enough money for their old age.  
Here is an intelligent response to the challenge before us. 
However, and it is regrettable in this era of the welfare state, it seems to me that we prefer to make sweeping rules that apply to everyone in order to resolve the problem of a few.  
 Therefore , the Government of Canada will provide increased support to the Canada and will make special efforts to support culture at home and to promote trade in Canadian cultural and educational products and services abroad .
 to will support , provide . Canadian of at educational products Therefore special to the support abroad promote to Council the services Canada efforts will trade and and and Government in cultural culture home increased and Canada
 to support the educational products Therefore , the at provide Council services increased Canada Government to will promote home make Canadian abroad Canada . and to and cultural of and in and efforts culture special support will
 and home efforts and , support of to make culture Canada increased Council promote will special to . Therefore educational at abroad products Canadian and Canada the support cultural trade and will to provide Government the services
We will make the information and knowledge infrastructure accessible to all Canadians by the year 2000, thereby making Canada the most connected nation in the world. 
 , all will by the 2000 year connected Canadians make the making world the in knowledge nation infrastructure . We accessible the information Canada most and to thereby
 in We , information nation . by all the to the most infrastructure the making accessible world Canada knowledge connected make year 2000 the thereby Canadians and will
 We and thereby year the the Canadians to most 2000 . the world knowledge infrastructure the make in will information accessible by nation Canada all connected making ,
 making in thereby 2000 Canadians the by infrastructure and nation , to world Canada . connected accessible make most the We information all the the knowledge will year
 by year making thereby the will in most infrastructure 2000 Canada connected knowledge Canadians , and the all nation world information to We the accessible . make the
 to world thereby infrastructure the information the by the most and will make 2000 all knowledge connected Canada the We . nation in , making accessible Canadians year
 Canada year knowledge will nation most to accessible information the infrastructure the world connected all Canadians , make and thereby making 2000 in We by the . the
 , making infrastructure thereby and nation make Canadians We the the accessible to by most year the the 2000 . all in knowledge information world Canada will connected
 make We Canadians and information Canada in the thereby , by world 2000 knowledge all the the . year connected infrastructure will nation the accessible most making to
 world the the infrastructure year knowledge . to in Canada and all , accessible Canadians thereby We the connected the most information make 2000 by will making nation
 make knowledge in most all the and information the We the thereby to nation Canada world infrastructure Canadians by making , will 2000 year connected . the accessible
 thereby , and all nation most infrastructure We will the connected the by accessible the make year . 2000 Canada world information Canadians making to in knowledge the
 information Canadians world the in thereby 2000 making the the knowledge most will accessible and make . connected , We year to by Canada all the infrastructure nation
 year world thereby nation , the knowledge 2000 the We most infrastructure and the connected information making by . the Canadians Canada to accessible in will all make
 . connected will information knowledge 2000 to Canadians thereby the the infrastructure Canada We world making year accessible make , all in nation most the the by and
 will accessible infrastructure year and nation . Canada We make world most the knowledge connected the information in all making , the thereby to Canadians 2000 the by
That is what the Constitution says.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
I do not disagree.  
Senator Grafstein :
That is what section 93 says.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
No, section 93 does not say that.  
Senator Grafstein :
The Province of Quebec, by its lawfully elected assembly, has requested a resolution amending the Constitution. 
How can I ask them to respect the Constitution if I do not respect the Constitution? 
I respect the Constitution.  
Honourable senators, this is a lawful request done in a lawful way. 
Perhaps certain words are egregious, but it is done in a lawful way, and I am prepared to support them. 
To my mind, the fact that they are prepared to proceed with their reforms before we legislate in any way, shape or form is their business; it is not my business. 
My business is to uphold the Constitution when they request we uphold processes under the Constitution.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
The reform of the school system in Quebec has nothing to do with the Constitution, even less with section 93. 
That was admitted in front of the committee.  
I will give you the answer to my question, and it should trouble all of us. 
The answer is that Quebec wants to be exempted from providing Catholic and Protestant teaching in the public school system. 
 We will make the information and infrastructure accessible to all Canadians by the year 2000 , thereby making Canada the most connected nation in the world .
 Canada most and will the by 2000 the . , making the make connected Canadians in We knowledge nation thereby infrastructure information accessible world to the all
 Canadians year the in infrastructure the most thereby all connected will making world . , and to make the knowledge We the nation by information Canada 2000
 We thereby and information Canadians by . the the world make the knowledge 2000 nation most making in accessible will connected infrastructure year to the all ,
This will provide individuals, schools, libraries, small and large businesses, rural and Aboriginal communities, public institutions, and all levels of government with new opportunities for learning, interacting, transacting business and developing their social and economic potential. 
 their large , businesses , all opportunities interacting , rural for social provide economic levels transacting institutions with and of , libraries Aboriginal and and and public , business and , new government communities individuals small . developing This potential schools learning will , ,
 will , and new , all , schools communities potential , businesses , for transacting of . large , developing interacting their learning government opportunities with and , social institutions Aboriginal economic and , public individuals small provide and levels rural and libraries This business
 , public business and , rural large communities , of , , and transacting new interacting . and institutions , all and and individuals developing potential will social opportunities levels libraries their , provide , small schools government learning This businesses with for Aboriginal economic
 potential public and economic , small and libraries social , all , government for with communities developing provide Aboriginal and and , levels , their new transacting This large , individuals interacting rural and institutions businesses opportunities , , learning . business schools of will
 , businesses developing economic This public government Aboriginal with , for individuals rural and , large opportunities new transacting communities small institutions levels and , their of business and and , , libraries provide , , social schools potential learning all interacting will and .
 all , developing , institutions of , rural public and business schools with This potential provide learning for new , opportunities and individuals small will and communities their large businesses , levels and , social . libraries government , and Aboriginal transacting interacting , economic
 institutions , and potential public This with interacting transacting and , opportunities social Aboriginal for business and large , rural . levels provide , their schools , of small all and businesses , economic libraries communities , will , individuals developing government new learning and
 will schools provide , institutions developing opportunities for economic communities of , learning and . transacting individuals social businesses , rural public interacting and small and , , and , and potential new all This , libraries business levels Aboriginal , with their government large
 business potential institutions economic and , with and government This large , for developing learning , of small and , individuals will businesses Aboriginal , public their provide , interacting , opportunities , social communities and new rural transacting and libraries levels all . schools
 and transacting , individuals businesses , will opportunities and provide institutions communities , developing government , for , large libraries rural schools levels economic Aboriginal business with their potential all and . learning and new , small public social interacting , of and This ,
 small provide institutions schools and , , and will social interacting economic government and large , business , , levels , potential Aboriginal . transacting individuals rural opportunities communities and , libraries and for businesses of , their new learning all public This with developing
 learning , , , of and rural their individuals transacting will small communities , schools with provide new and interacting and Aboriginal large libraries developing . levels , for potential all institutions economic This , , government public and business businesses social , opportunities and
 individuals libraries government levels social , public and for with , of transacting developing learning provide , and economic communities and their and schools businesses business small This will rural new institutions Aboriginal and , , interacting , potential all opportunities , , large .
 businesses Aboriginal provide This new all individuals public social of transacting and and business and large institutions will their small . , with developing opportunities , economic and schools communities government , libraries for rural learning and interacting , , , , , potential levels
 businesses all This , , , Aboriginal and new small public communities and interacting individuals . government schools opportunities , libraries their provide economic , developing , potential and will for large learning , and and , institutions with business rural of transacting levels social
 . large , This of small , schools levels , economic developing libraries and learning will public transacting , their and , and , businesses institutions individuals and with , potential opportunities interacting new business for provide Aboriginal and , government all rural social communities
The regulations governing investments and the behaviour of administrators have not been revealed. 
They are not ready. 
What guidelines will there be for administrators? 
A parliamentary review is therefore vital before their implementation.  
In concluding, I would say to the government that the preferable alternative to its bill would be to simply oblige everyone in the labour force in Canada to invest a percentage of their savings in funds under private management or let government assume its role by providing a safety net for those who could not set aside enough money for their old age.  
Here is an intelligent response to the challenge before us. 
However, and it is regrettable in this era of the welfare state, it seems to me that we prefer to make sweeping rules that apply to everyone in order to resolve the problem of a few.  
Hon. Philippe Deane Gigantès :
You talk with admiration of private investment management. 
How do you explain the disaster at Olympia & York, for example, under the management of Mr. Eyton, our colleague, and the fact that major players like Conrad Black closed Dominion Stores and took the money Dominion Stores employees had invested in a pension fund, a fund they never drew from? 
Are you telling us that the private sector will be more generous and wise than the Caisse de dépôt in Quebec? 
Senator Bolduc :
I did not say disasters did not happen in the private sector. 
Senator Gigantès :
It is not a big deal if you have $3 million, but it is if you lose $35,000 or $70,000 and this is all the money you have. 
It may not be a big deal for you, but it is for small investors.  
Senator Bolduc :
Honourable senators, I never said there would not be any damage in the private sector. 
Some damage is done every day. 
But it is the private sector. 
 This will provide individuals , schools , libraries , small and large businesses , rural Aboriginal communities , public institutions , and all levels of government with new opportunities for learning , interacting , transacting business and developing their social and economic potential .
 developing economic , for This interacting and , , and schools , businesses provide government opportunities small with libraries , and transacting of potential large learning new rural , , communities levels business and public will social Aboriginal institutions , all . individuals their
 business and , for potential new their , opportunities , with This , large social government and learning , will developing levels individuals of libraries small , Aboriginal and rural . transacting and institutions public businesses provide communities , economic schools interacting and ,
 all libraries , . This learning transacting interacting levels , new provide businesses small , business and institutions , of , their and rural , , opportunities social and large Aboriginal with government economic potential public individuals and will developing , and schools communities
For example, we will enhance the voluntary sector's capacity to engage Canadians by improving their access to the technology they need to play a stronger role in Canadian life.  
 life Canadian technology in to to to sector example access capacity improving the Canadians the a need we For enhance s they engage ' will their by role stronger play . voluntary ,
 we access by voluntary Canadian to engage example need role For improving play sector life enhance they technology their capacity Canadians . stronger to the will the in , a to s '
 role will the in to access engage play to example For enhance Canadian , their capacity ' improving Canadians technology they to need by the life we sector stronger voluntary s a .
 Canadians Canadian to the , a access to need technology will engage sector For we voluntary enhance to the their ' play stronger example in they capacity life role improving by . s
 voluntary . role to engage a by the , to life capacity improving they technology sector For ' example enhance their s Canadian will the stronger access to Canadians in we play need
 access to they stronger , sector engage to technology will For in play the life by Canadian the Canadians need ' enhance capacity example . voluntary we role s to improving a their
 engage example sector improving to the For the Canadian to need in to Canadians . their by capacity s ' they will a stronger we role technology life voluntary play access , enhance
 to voluntary we improving enhance to role . will technology by a s need engage sector ' their stronger For in , example play Canadian capacity they to Canadians access the the life
 ' Canadian enhance engage . access voluntary to improving the a need play life will role we the technology stronger they example Canadians to s their sector to in For , capacity by
 stronger ' sector For will role engage they capacity their by life in to a we the example improving Canadian , Canadians play s to enhance technology access . to need the voluntary
 Canadians the improving we Canadian by to will stronger in sector , engage enhance voluntary the technology role capacity a ' . their to play life they For to access need example s
 a sector For Canadian by we play stronger to their s technology . improving Canadians life enhance the example capacity in access , need they will the ' engage to voluntary role to
 to in improving will need the life voluntary capacity play a Canadian to example sector ' technology by . they For stronger the role , engage enhance we access Canadians their to s
 capacity ' , improving they voluntary the s will example role . stronger the sector in enhance to access life Canadian For need engage their we a by to play Canadians technology to
 . example the need they Canadians technology access will sector enhance by we capacity to a stronger to ' engage their in , role For s improving to Canadian the life voluntary play
 , ' their we capacity s life they technology to by Canadian role play a the For sector need improving engage will to the example in enhance access . stronger voluntary to Canadians
The government's usual modus operandi is diversion, mixed with a little fabrication. 
It was convenient to have the diversion of a postal strike with its ensuing back-to-work legislation before the house while Bill C-2 was being introduced in the other place and closure was being imposed. 
It was also convenient for the government to falsely accuse the former prime minister of criminal intent and behaviour after its incompetence was fully exposed to the Canadian public following the Quebec referendum.  
It is not a question of means justifying the end. 
In this bill, the means and the end are equally wrong.  
Time allocation has been imposed seven times on other bills, most recently on third reading of Bill C-22, the Pearson airport bill. 
It was imposed on Bill C-110 which proposed certain constitutional amendments; on Bill C-12 which dealt with employment insurance; and on the committee report on Term 17. 
It is becoming a habit; a habit that is hard to break.  
Bill C-2 is just another in a series of bad bills, incompetent work and dictatorial action. 
It was introduced last week in the Senate, preceded by time allocation in the other place. 
With passage of this bill, the government will be imposing the largest tax grab in the history of the country. 
Canadians are unaware of what is happening, in particular our young people who will be the most affected and the most mistreated. 
We owe it to them, our grandchildren and our children, to study this legislation thoroughly and to amend it, because it is not their fault that this program has been so badly managed. 
They will have little chance of collecting under the CPP, hence the changes the government intends to make.  
We are simply shovelling our hard-earned money into the greedy hands of Paul Martin, Minister of Finance, who wants to be the man who slays the deficit dragon, and we know how he intends to do it. 
He has followed three policy themes to accomplish that end.  
First, he has transferred much of the tax burden to the provinces, forcing what I call "downloaded increased taxes." 
Provincial and municipal governments, who were receiving less money, had to increase taxes. 
The government transferred debt.  
Second, this government has taken advantage of the low interest rates which resulted from the efforts of the Conservative government over eight years to bring the deficit and inflation under control and to bring interest rates down.  
 For example , we will enhance the voluntary sector ' capacity to engage Canadians by improving their access to the technology they need to play a stronger role in Canadian life .
 play to example technology role Canadians to need enhance engage ' the we sector capacity their improving . stronger a to Canadian they the in , s life voluntary by will For
 to will . the enhance access s we to improving technology stronger engage role play need ' the Canadians For they life their by voluntary a example capacity Canadian to in ,
 access by ' Canadian role example , For they voluntary technology a will . to s in improving play stronger we the sector to Canadians the their engage capacity to enhance need
A connected nation is more than wires, cables and computers. 
 connected wires . and nation than is , cables more computers A
 wires , computers more nation cables . connected and is A than
 is A computers cables connected and more than wires . , nation
 connected more and computers A is cables , nation . wires than
 A , . nation computers cables wires more is than connected and
 A computers connected and , is . than nation cables more wires
 is nation more . cables connected A than and computers , wires
 cables , more computers nation A connected wires and is . than
 , computers and more . is than connected cables nation A wires
 cables , connected than more and wires A . nation is computers
 connected nation computers is and A than . wires cables , more
 A cables nation computers . than , and more connected is wires
 and computers wires than A cables , more connected nation is .
 A connected nation , is . than computers cables more wires and
 nation connected A more and cables computers , wires . than is
 A nation and cables more wires than . is computers , connected
The Prime Minister has said he was prepared to negotiate. 
The Leader of the Government in the Senate has said the government is not prepared to negotiate.  
This morning, the Quebec minister of intergovernmental affairs, Mr. Brassard, said, and I quote: 
This is what we have always said.  
Bear in mind that this minister is a separatist. 
I repeat what he said: 
This is what we have always said.  
Mr. Chrétien has acknowledged that the federal government would negotiate. 
Could the Leader of the Government in the Senate tell us under what authority the Prime Minister could negotiate?  
Senator Graham :
The Prime Minister would be negotiating on behalf of Canadians, but recognizing at the same time that nine other provinces and the territories are involved. 
I am sure the Prime Minister would take all of that into consideration.  
Senator Nolin :
The Supreme Court received the request from your government to decide on the issue of Quebec's secession. 
We will learn in all likelihood from the Supreme Court that the amending formula would be appropriate if Canadians agreed to allow one province to separate from the others. 
Have the Prime Minister, the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs or officials of your government had formal or informal discussions on this matter with the representatives of the nine other provinces?  
Senator Graham :
Not that I am aware, honourable senators. 
We are aware, of course, of the meetings that took place with the premiers in Calgary. 
We know there is a first ministers' conference later this week in Ottawa, at which this matter may or may not arise. 
 A connected nation more than wires , cables and computers .
 , connected computers is . more wires nation A and cables
 , . more wires and than nation A connected computers cables
 cables computers A wires , connected and is . nation than
The Government will continue to work with provinces to ensure greater mobility for people with disabilities and to ensure their integration into the economic and social mainstream of Canadian life. 
 their Canadian ensure for the of integration to life work with greater and . ensure economic disabilities social continue to into The with provinces people to mobility mainstream and Government will
 and life greater into mainstream Government Canadian economic work with will to of disabilities for mobility . integration The to to social ensure continue with people ensure their provinces and the
 and ensure ensure continue into to social disabilities with the Government . integration mobility The greater work will mainstream Canadian to provinces to their and for people of life with economic
 ensure and social Government work life continue to provinces to the for will with of and into . greater Canadian economic disabilities mobility mainstream The to ensure their integration people with
 mainstream the provinces integration with continue Government life of into The Canadian and people . to work disabilities mobility ensure will social for ensure to their greater and to with economic
 people with to and life social mobility Canadian mainstream economic greater integration the The disabilities . will and provinces into for Government ensure to work their with continue ensure to of
 continue work the disabilities Government integration with their social greater provinces to to and The Canadian and into mainstream people economic ensure will ensure for to with mobility . life of
 greater provinces to The and ensure of and mainstream with Canadian integration social to the disabilities ensure mobility work continue with their to people Government for economic life will into .
 mobility the work with provinces life to social continue The to ensure economic greater Government with people mainstream and integration to of for disabilities and . into Canadian will ensure their
 their mainstream into of continue economic for greater and to to life the disabilities Canadian and will The with . integration people with to Government provinces social ensure mobility ensure work
 mobility into people provinces will work for mainstream Government and ensure to greater with continue social Canadian . to to integration of ensure disabilities life The the economic their with and
 The continue social for and provinces to people economic with with work of Government life to . to ensure will disabilities ensure greater and into mobility their the Canadian mainstream integration
 the economic to mainstream will their Canadian Government to greater The and mobility people social provinces into of and with for with work disabilities . continue to ensure integration ensure life
 into to with life continue ensure Canadian . social greater Government for work provinces of disabilities their mainstream people to the will integration to ensure The mobility and with economic and
 to work . continue ensure disabilities to life and with Canadian with ensure provinces their Government and The to greater mainstream economic the mobility of social integration people for into will
 of to their ensure social with greater provinces to Government . to with mobility Canadian ensure will into integration and for disabilities continue The life people the work mainstream and economic
It is difficult to see how their accessibility to denominational teaching in the public school system will be abrogated in the short run. 
Obviously, it is no small solace, unlike the case for many years in the province of Ontario, that minority denominational rights, religious education, was achieved, in part, through public funding in the province of Quebec. In other words, as Senator Lavoie-Roux pointed out, in the province of Ontario there is and was no public funding of other religious or denominational schools, unlike Ontario. 
I want to make specific reference to this point because I have some personal experience in this regard. 
Access to public funding in Quebec for denominational education remains available in Quebec. 
I find it hard to believe how the Province of Quebec in the future, even if the notwithstanding clauses are removed, would not continue to fund denominational training. 
Whether it is through a charter school, a public school system, or through a publicly funded private school system, denominational training to all groups, in my view, will continue in the province of Quebec for the foreseeable future.  
Since we are projecting the future, that is my prediction for the future.  
I wish to mention yet another aspect of the testimony referred to in the Reform Party opinion which is appended to the report.  
At the last minute, after all the testimony was taken, the Reform members of the committee introduced a long petition containing thousands of names objecting to the federal resolution. 
Every opportunity was presented for these voices to be heard during the course of the hearings. 
We did not deny them an opportunity to be heard. 
On the other hand, we were not given an opportunity by the Reform Party to cross-examine those petitioners or to decide what weight, if any, we should give to their petition.  
I concluded, honourable senators, that the overwhelming evidence was that the majority of the minorities affected by these rights and privilege were in favour of the amendments.  
The Roman Catholic Archbishops of Quebec and the Anglican Archbishop have letters on record in which they clearly indicate they did not oppose the amendment.  
I want to read those letters into the record because they are important.  
A different situation exists in Quebec. 
Nevertheless, our assembly did not oppose the choice to amend section 93. 
It has always been our conviction that the choice of means is the responsibility of the political authorities.  
They did not oppose.  
The Anglican Archbishop, Archbishop Andrew S. Hutchison, said the following at paragraph 2 of his letter dated November 3: 
 The Government will continue to work with provinces to ensure greater mobility people with disabilities and to ensure their integration into the economic and social mainstream of Canadian life .
 to . greater work Government the The to Canadian with people mobility ensure into economic of their integration life provinces will and with mainstream disabilities ensure to social for and
 ensure continue economic Canadian into for the social Government people The provinces work to mainstream with their integration to and life ensure to and greater . disabilities mobility of will
 social will with Canadian the disabilities and life people and for of to mainstream integration mobility The to . Government to their greater with ensure economic work into provinces continue
The Government will also bring forward measures to strengthen networks among Canadians and to increase knowledge of Canada and understanding among Canadians; these measures will include enhanced exchange programs for young Canadians.  
 among increase will knowledge to and understanding bring Canadians include among also forward Canadians . these measures enhanced exchange to Government of ; strengthen Canada for will programs measures networks young The and Canadians
 to measures Canadians young exchange bring among Canadians these knowledge of ; Canada . understanding Canadians measures and strengthen for enhanced will programs Government to include among and forward The increase will networks also
 among ; will these measures Government knowledge of programs Canadians include forward also and bring . to to will The and strengthen increase young exchange for measures understanding among Canada networks Canadians enhanced Canadians
 Canada to exchange and will increase measures these Canadians for to understanding young programs among strengthen among Canadians enhanced will and networks Government ; include measures bring . of also forward Canadians knowledge The
 ; young to strengthen and networks include Canadians increase forward exchange also enhanced to these and . measures Canadians programs Canadians measures will Canada knowledge The will Government for understanding among of bring among
 bring to Canada measures increase of these enhanced understanding Canadians strengthen . and to Government will networks for also knowledge among exchange Canadians measures among The ; will programs Canadians forward and include young
 measures increase networks programs to enhanced The strengthen include . among among Government Canadians these Canadians forward exchange and Canada of also and for will to young Canadians knowledge understanding measures ; will bring
 to increase include Canadians understanding will among and Canadians programs of forward among bring networks . Government Canadians The will measures enhanced ; to these Canada strengthen knowledge also measures young exchange and for
 Canada for will measures include to among will understanding and knowledge measures Canadians and Canadians enhanced exchange Government ; also among young these The forward . networks to of Canadians programs strengthen bring increase
 The young Canadians among forward bring to include increase understanding and and measures among Canadians will will programs exchange of also . Canada Government strengthen for measures to knowledge networks ; these enhanced Canadians
 include . increase The Canadians programs among measures understanding enhanced bring to Canadians exchange measures to for of Canadians Canada strengthen will among and forward young will also Government ; networks knowledge and these
 Canadians will Government include among measures young to . programs and Canada and The enhanced to ; increase among knowledge bring these Canadians will forward for of exchange networks strengthen Canadians also measures understanding
 ; forward Canadians to Canada for also enhanced and Canadians to and networks will will programs of young . measures The these among bring strengthen understanding increase Government exchange knowledge Canadians include measures among
 Canada among understanding networks programs include to measures increase young for bring enhanced of knowledge forward to ; will and measures Canadians Canadians also Canadians these Government among and exchange will strengthen . The
 ; and bring enhanced The strengthen for forward and among Canadians among will Canadians programs increase include Government . understanding will Canadians these to exchange knowledge young also measures Canada to networks measures of
 networks programs and Canada among for forward include Canadians to these Canadians increase understanding to bring knowledge will exchange Canadians among measures will The measures and enhanced . young ; of also Government strengthen
He has followed three policy themes to accomplish that end.  
First, he has transferred much of the tax burden to the provinces, forcing what I call "downloaded increased taxes." 
Provincial and municipal governments, who were receiving less money, had to increase taxes. 
The government transferred debt.  
Second, this government has taken advantage of the low interest rates which resulted from the efforts of the Conservative government over eight years to bring the deficit and inflation under control and to bring interest rates down.  
Third, Paul Martin then not only raised licence fees and taxes, he used the accumulated surplus in the EI fund to pay down the deficit. 
It is this third policy theme with which we, on this side, feel most uncomfortable. 
He used the surplus in the EI fund, not to extend benefits, not to reduce premiums - which is normally what is done in a payroll deduction - but to cut benefits for a totally separate policy objective. 
He used this payroll tax purely and simply, to achieve his policy goal of cutting the deficit.  
That is why the Auditor General is prohibited from examining the fund unless the directors of the fund agree. 
It should not be for the directors to agree or disagree. 
Parliament must insist that the Auditor General report to us on the fund and on its administration. 
However, the Auditor General will report to the directors of the fund on how they manage their affairs. 
That is not acceptable.  
We are talking of $100 billion by the year 2006, and rapid increases thereafter. 
On this record, it will fail.  
It is an anomaly of governments to charge taxes for employment insurance premiums, and then reduce services to accumulate a surplus to pay down a deficit. 
It then writes cheques for something else. 
The government charges taxes for transportation then imposes user fees at airports and tolls on highways for the right to use the airports and highways that we have paid taxes to build and maintain. 
It imposes taxes to create historical sites and national parks and then charge people to get in. 
 The Government will also bring measures to strengthen networks among Canadians and to increase knowledge of Canada and understanding among Canadians ; these measures will include enhanced exchange programs for young Canadians .
 and . will for bring enhanced young Canadians and these to measures forward increase include of measures knowledge The among understanding Government programs among will also Canada Canadians strengthen networks to exchange Canadians
 bring Government The Canadians Canadians include Canada these among . ; increase and for will understanding and measures also will among of exchange networks knowledge young programs to Canadians measures forward strengthen enhanced
 and Canadians forward among for enhanced Canada to among bring Canadians Canadians measures will of and understanding measures also these will exchange young to . include Government increase knowledge programs strengthen ; The
Expanding Opportunities in Aboriginal Communities 
 Opportunities Aboriginal Communities Expanding in
 Aboriginal Communities Expanding Opportunities in
 Communities in Expanding Aboriginal Opportunities
 Aboriginal Expanding in Opportunities Communities
 Communities Expanding Opportunities Aboriginal in
 in Aboriginal Communities Opportunities Expanding
 Communities Opportunities in Expanding Aboriginal
 Opportunities Expanding Aboriginal in Communities
 Expanding Aboriginal Opportunities Communities in
 Aboriginal in Expanding Communities Opportunities
 Expanding in Opportunities Aboriginal Communities
 Expanding Opportunities Communities Aboriginal in
 Aboriginal in Opportunities Expanding Communities
 Aboriginal Communities in Expanding Opportunities
 Opportunities Expanding in Aboriginal Communities
 Communities Expanding Opportunities Aboriginal in
This is all very interesting, but none of them will have as much money as the one we are talking about. 
We are talking about an annual amount on the order of 15 per cent to 20 per cent of Canada's gross national product. 
It is an enormous amount. 
I therefore think there has to be some sort of accountability, and one of the ways to achieve that is for parliamentarians to be involved in drafting the Auditor General's report; in my view, there should be an amendment along these lines, to guarantee that that is the case.  
Hon. Jerahmiel S. Grafstein :
Honourable senators, I have a brief question for Senator Bolduc. 
I believe the Caisse de Dépôt is the most powerful pension fund in Canada. 
What accountability does that fund have to the Canadian public?  
Senator Bolduc :
It has not very much accountability to the Canadian public. 
This has been discussed many times in Quebec City and last year, for the first time, they appeared before a parliamentary committee. 
This is a serious matter.  
Senator Grafstein :
Honourable senators, I do not question the issue of accountability. 
The problem is whether one would be able to obtain the very best people by the public process, the newspaper process or the media process, or whether the accountability process is better when governments, which are indirectly accountable, make those appointments and those nominated are then accountable to a parliamentary committee.  
Senator Bolduc :
When you talk about "accountability," I would suggest that that is second best. 
It is not a perfect situation, although you will have a parliamentary committee taking some responsibility. 
It is better than nothing but, in my opinion, it is second best.  
I am fairly sure that, in one way, the pure accountability we are talking about is quasi-impossible. 
 Opportunities in Aboriginal Communities
 Expanding Opportunities in Aboriginal
 Expanding Opportunities Communities in
 in Communities Opportunities Expanding
Thousands of years ago, Aboriginal people began building Canada's first communities. 
 Canada building years began , ago first ' communities s Thousands of people Aboriginal .
 Thousands ago Canada people first ' s communities Aboriginal began of , . years building
 people Aboriginal Thousands of began , ago s years ' building communities . Canada first
 Aboriginal ago communities Canada years . people of building first began s , Thousands '
 communities years Canada people Aboriginal Thousands . of , began ago first building ' s
 building of s years ago first ' . Aboriginal began people Canada Thousands communities ,
 ' people Thousands first Canada s began . of Aboriginal , ago building communities years
 . communities of Aboriginal ago Canada first ' began building Thousands , people years s
 Thousands communities Canada people first Aboriginal began of ago ' , building s . years
 , . people Aboriginal communities began ' ago first years of Canada building s Thousands
 . first years Aboriginal , of Thousands began Canada ' s people building communities ago
 first of Aboriginal people s , communities Thousands building years . began ' ago Canada
 building ago people s . of years communities Canada Thousands Aboriginal , ' began first
 first began communities years ago . s ' building Aboriginal Canada people of Thousands ,
 Thousands Canada ago . people Aboriginal s began years , first of ' communities building
 years first , building communities Aboriginal ' people . Thousands Canada of ago began s
We gather evidence, we serve as our own advisors, seek our own counsel, we become judges, and we become the jury. 
We are the supreme court of the land when it comes to legislation. 
We must view the evidence before committees with care. 
I urge all senators, before they vote, to carefully review the full transcript of the evidence.  
Let me say at the outset that I was very sceptical, particularly after having read the Quebec resolution which was adopted unanimously in the Quebec Assembly, save for two abstentions, and which was quickly passed by the Quebec assembly requesting the federal government amend section 93 of the Constitution by deleting the subsections in so far as their application pertains to Quebec. 
These sections were incorporated in the British North American Act, 1867. 
The Quebec resolution in its fourth recital gave the Quebec assembly's opinion that the proposed amendment to section 93 requested in no way constituted recognition by the Quebec assembly of the Constitution Act, 1982, which was adopted without its consent.  
Honourable senators, noticing as you must that I am and remain a staunch supporter of the Constitution Act, 1982, this caused me great personal grief and concern.  
The first hurdle I had to overcome was whether or not the wording of the Quebec resolution on its face was so invidious, so egregious and so inconsistent that the recital made it inoperable and, in the process, would defeat its own request to amend the 1867 provisions by the mechanisms of the 1982 Constitution.  
I asked myself how the Province of Quebec could be asking for an amendment to the Constitution contained in the 1867 British North America Act, which was now part of the 1982 Constitution, while recognizing that the only methodology available to Parliament would be via the Constitution Act, 1982.  
Section 43 of the 1982 Constitution contains bilateral amendment processes between the federal government and provinces where their interests are solely engaged. 
Clearly, the only highway, the only path the Government of Quebec or the assembly of Quebec could take to achieve its objective was via the 1982 Constitution.  
Honourable senators, I then examined the federal resolution, which is the one we are being asked to consider. 
The federal resolution differs substantially from the Quebec resolutions. 
They are both appended to the report for your consideration.  
The federal resolution made reference not only to the 1982 Constitution, but to section 23 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedom incorporated in the Constitution Act, 1982.  
I concluded, after listening carefully to legal advice proffered before the committee, that the operative clause of any constitutional resolution was the wording of the amending clause itself. 
While recitals are of interest, while they are opinionated, while they are descriptive, they are not binding.  
Again, it was clear to me that the only way that the federal government could accede to the Quebec assembly's request was by utilizing the 1982 Constitution. 
The Government of Quebec knew this. 
 Thousands of years ago , Aboriginal people began building Canada ' s communities .
 Canada ago s , people years Thousands building ' of began first Aboriginal communities
 communities building , people s of Canada Thousands ago began Aboriginal years ' first
 Aboriginal began Thousands building , years Canada ago . of communities s ' people
Today, by strengthening our Aboriginal communities, we are reinforcing the diversity that makes Canada unique in the world. 
 by reinforcing , , Canada in makes the communities that diversity . Today unique strengthening world are we the our Aboriginal
 the diversity , strengthening by makes . Today reinforcing we that world are , Aboriginal the unique our Canada communities in
 the that by , diversity , we reinforcing communities world . unique strengthening are our Canada makes Today the in Aboriginal
 diversity Today that communities world the makes . we unique Aboriginal , Canada , the our in by are reinforcing strengthening
 diversity the that world our the makes , , Aboriginal by . strengthening we Today are Canada unique communities in reinforcing
 in , we communities . the , the world strengthening that diversity Today by reinforcing unique are makes Canada Aboriginal our
 world that Canada by Today , , in Aboriginal our strengthening we the diversity unique communities makes are . reinforcing the
 the , that Canada makes communities reinforcing our Today strengthening in unique by , are . diversity we world Aboriginal the
 the Today we are world , reinforcing , makes unique that the our Aboriginal by communities Canada in strengthening diversity .
 our Canada , , communities unique by the Today Aboriginal that . we in diversity are the world makes strengthening reinforcing
 strengthening diversity Aboriginal the world , our are , Canada we that communities Today reinforcing the makes . unique in by
 that Canada in diversity the communities world Today , unique , the by our we are Aboriginal strengthening makes . reinforcing
 Canada the Aboriginal . we by unique communities the reinforcing strengthening in that makes our Today are , world diversity ,
 the strengthening . diversity Aboriginal our by , reinforcing unique that we , world communities Today makes in the Canada are
 the diversity , our Aboriginal are by reinforcing communities unique that world in makes Today Canada strengthening . the we ,
 in Aboriginal , makes reinforcing communities strengthening Canada unique . are world , our diversity the we the Today that by
Every opportunity was presented for these voices to be heard during the course of the hearings. 
We did not deny them an opportunity to be heard. 
On the other hand, we were not given an opportunity by the Reform Party to cross-examine those petitioners or to decide what weight, if any, we should give to their petition.  
I concluded, honourable senators, that the overwhelming evidence was that the majority of the minorities affected by these rights and privilege were in favour of the amendments.  
The Roman Catholic Archbishops of Quebec and the Anglican Archbishop have letters on record in which they clearly indicate they did not oppose the amendment.  
I want to read those letters into the record because they are important.  
A different situation exists in Quebec. 
Nevertheless, our assembly did not oppose the choice to amend section 93. 
It has always been our conviction that the choice of means is the responsibility of the political authorities.  
They did not oppose.  
The Anglican Archbishop, Archbishop Andrew S. Hutchison, said the following at paragraph 2 of his letter dated November 3: 
The amendments proposed to Article 93 by the Quebec government, which would remove the obligation for the Quebec government to have confessional school boards, seems reasonable to us and in keeping with traditional positions enunciated by the Anglican church.  
Honourable senators, the senior representatives of the mainstream Roman Catholic and Protestant groups did not register their opposition to these changes. 
This does not mean that this exercise was one of perfection. 
Indeed, many of us remain unhappy and regret the federal government's position taken with 23(1)( a ) then and now. 
I share, with Senator Pitfield and others, concern in that respect. 
However, unfortunately, I have a memory, and I recall very well that the 1982 Constitution, for which Senator Pitfield was a senior federal advisor, was a minimalist not a maximalist document. 
It was Senator Pitfield and others in power at the time who determined that, in order to pass the 1982 Constitution, the Province of Quebec should be given the option of proclaiming section 23(1)( a ) and that the notwithstanding clause would be incorporated in the 1982 Constitution to eviscerate the charter, both serious sources of our current distress.  
Many of us objected strenuously then, and do now, to giving the Province of Quebec these options. 
However, that is history. 
 Today by strengthening our Aboriginal communities , we are reinforcing the diversity that makes Canada unique in the world .
 the strengthening by world reinforcing Canada diversity our communities Today makes , . , that we are Aboriginal the unique
 that strengthening by Today in our communities are Canada the Aboriginal world , diversity makes reinforcing we the , unique
 . strengthening the communities in by unique makes we the that our reinforcing , Canada diversity world Today are ,
The Government will: 
 : The will Government
 Government will : The
 : Government The will
 The will : Government
 Government will The :
 will Government : The
 : will The Government
 The Government will :
 : will The Government
 Government : will The
 The : Government will
 The Government : will
 The Government will :
 will : The Government
 will The Government :
 will The : Government
That is fine, if the government wants to do that. 
Now you have two guys living together; one dies, the other one is picking up some cash. 
That costs more money. 
Well, two guys who live together for one year may not be gay. 
How would you know?  
Senator Gigantès :
You want surveillance cameras?  
Senator Tkachuk :
So there is an opportunity for fraud. 
This is not a pension program. 
Let us make that clear. 
This is a payroll tax to pay Old Age Pensions, disability, life insurance, benefits to survivors, orphans, children, or exemptions for child rearing. 
We did not have that either, and there is nothing wrong with that. 
They decided that seven years of child rearing would make you part of the CPP labour force, and therefore you can get benefits. 
That is a social program; a good social program, but it is coming out of the pension fund.  
We have spent all this cash over the last 30 years and we say now, "Oh, it is not our fault. 
It is not legislators' fault. 
Senator Gigantès :
Are you quoting the Reform Party?  
Senator Tkachuk :
 The Government will
 The will :
 Government The will
 : The Government
develop relationships with Aboriginal people based on the principles of partnership, transparency, predictability and accountability; 
 relationships with the on partnership , people of principles based ; and predictability Aboriginal , accountability transparency develop
 and the relationships people based Aboriginal principles with predictability of ; , partnership on transparency develop , accountability
 accountability relationships develop Aboriginal people , on with based of principles transparency ; and partnership the predictability ,
 accountability and on of with principles ; the Aboriginal based predictability develop , transparency relationships partnership people ,
 on , of and develop people predictability Aboriginal ; partnership , the with transparency accountability relationships based principles
 ; based principles accountability partnership relationships and transparency Aboriginal with the develop , on , people of predictability
 , of based the relationships with predictability , transparency accountability Aboriginal partnership principles ; develop and on people
 on and transparency the ; predictability Aboriginal people based of principles develop , with partnership accountability relationships ,
 principles Aboriginal people the accountability predictability develop , with ; on and , of relationships partnership based transparency
 transparency ; principles partnership , the develop , on predictability relationships accountability with and people of Aboriginal based
 partnership accountability ; Aboriginal develop with of based predictability and , , on principles relationships people transparency the
 Aboriginal and the of relationships partnership principles , people , predictability on develop with ; based transparency accountability
 relationships , and Aboriginal based develop ; the of predictability , principles accountability partnership transparency people on with
 predictability , of partnership develop accountability people on with , the transparency Aboriginal and ; principles relationships based
 people , relationships partnership with based of principles transparency on and predictability the Aboriginal develop , ; accountability
 based , Aboriginal with predictability , the on accountability partnership of ; transparency develop principles relationships and people
and whereas section 43 of the Constitution Act, 1982 provides that an amendment to the Constitution of Canada may be made by proclamation issued by the Governor General under the Great Seal of Canada where so authorized by resolutions of the Senate and House of Commons and of the legislative assembly of each province to which the amendment applies; 
now therefore the Senate resolves that an amendment to the Constitution of Canada be authorized to be made by proclamation issued by His Excellency the Governor General under the Great Seal of Canada in accordance with the schedule hereto.  
SCHEDULE 
AMENDMENT TO THE CONSTITUTION OF CANADA 
CONSTITUTION ACT, 1867 
The Constitution Act, 1867, is amended by adding, immediately after section 93, the following: 
"93A. 
Paragraphs (1) to (4) of section 93 do not apply to Quebec." 
CITATION 
2. This Amendment may be cited as the Constitution Amendment (year of proclamation) (Quebec).  
The special joint committee on which I have the honour to sit was given the mandate of studying the proposed amendment to section 93. 
Today, we have before us the resolution to amend section 93 of the Constitution Act, 1867.  
Briefly put, I support this resolution. 
I am also convinced that the majority of Catholic parents in Quebec who enjoy the guarantees provided under section 93 support this amendment, as do the majority of Protestant parents, who are in the same situation.  
However, the Quebec National Assembly will no longer be subject to legislation predating Confederation with respect to denominational instruction.  
These laws of Quebec that predate Confederation and concern Catholic and Protestant denominational schools have led to the creation of an unusual system, which gave Catholic and Protestant parents different rights, according to where they lived in the province.  
Catholic and Protestant school boards are thus to be found protected by the Constitution within the old limits of Montreal and Quebec City. 
Elsewhere in the province the Catholic school boards are not protected by the Constitution, except in predominantly Protestant districts, where Catholic parents are in the minority.  
Outside Montreal and Quebec City, the Constitution protects Protestant school boards if, in a district with a Catholic majority, the Protestant parents are in the minority.  
Honourable senators, educational reform has been a concern of Quebec governments for over 30 years. 
 develop relationships with Aboriginal people based the principles of partnership , transparency , predictability and accountability ;
 , the and develop transparency relationships , on based accountability people principles Aboriginal partnership with of predictability
 predictability relationships , people develop accountability the based partnership , principles with ; of and Aboriginal transparency
 Aboriginal with and of relationships ; , the principles , people transparency predictability based partnership accountability on
support the building of strong Aboriginal communities - communities that provide their members with better living standards and opportunities; and 
 opportunities provide and that - of living communities ; better members their the communities strong building and support with standards Aboriginal
 communities opportunities communities that provide members and and support better standards - of ; the Aboriginal building with living strong their
 communities their living better opportunities and and the standards Aboriginal - support ; that members with of building provide strong communities
 and the provide their communities support and Aboriginal that communities better of ; opportunities strong standards living building - members with
 ; communities of the standards with Aboriginal better that - living provide building members and strong communities and support their opportunities
 - Aboriginal of living strong better support with their communities communities opportunities the provide members ; and building and that standards
 standards better strong and ; opportunities of communities building living - Aboriginal and communities with their provide members support that the
 strong Aboriginal their - opportunities ; support communities members and living that the standards provide better communities of with and building
 with standards living their communities strong support - and building and ; Aboriginal members better that communities of opportunities the provide
 and communities opportunities that the members - strong communities living provide better support and standards building with ; of Aboriginal their
 the with living communities support strong building opportunities provide Aboriginal standards better and their and that communities of ; members -
 members opportunities communities strong of better that Aboriginal with communities and the standards provide living - support building and ; their
 strong and and support standards provide with ; living their building communities communities better opportunities of the members that - Aboriginal
 the standards communities with and communities their ; that better provide living building and - opportunities members strong support Aboriginal of
 - building and members communities support the ; provide communities that living their better standards strong of opportunities Aboriginal and with
 Aboriginal and their ; of better standards building provide strong and members living opportunities with communities support communities the - that
Senator Chalifoux :
We talked to the Conservative government about that for many years and nothing was done.  
Senator Comeau :
We are not in power now. 
You should push your people.  
On motion of Senator Gigantès, debate adjourned.  
Canada Cooperatives Bill 
First Reading 
The Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C-5, respecting cooperatives.  
Bill read first time.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
When shall this bill be read the second time?  
On motion of Senator Carstairs, bill placed on Orders of the Day for second reading on Thursday next, December 11, 1997.  
Bill to Amend-Second Reading-Motions in Amendment-Debate Adjourned to Await Ruling of Speaker 
On the Order: 
Resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Moore, seconded by the Honourable Senator Ferretti Barth, for the second reading of Bill C-16, An Act to amend the Criminal Code and the interpretation Act (powers to arrest and enter dwellings), 
And on the motion in amendment of the Honourable Senator Cools, seconded by the Honourable Senator Sparrow, that the motion be amended by deleting all the words after "That" and substituting the following therefor: 
"Bill C-16, An Act to amend the Criminal Code and the Interpretation Act (powers to arrest and enter dwellings), be not now read a second time because 
( a ) the Senate is opposed to the principle of a bill which has been placed before Parliament as a result of the judgment of the Supreme Court of Canada of May 22, 1997, and of the Court's Orders of June 27 and November 19, 1997; 
( b ) the Senate finds it repugnant that the Supreme Court is infringing on the sovereign rights of Parliament to enact legislation and is failing to respect the constitutional comity between the courts and Parliament; and 
 support the building of strong Aboriginal communities - communities that provide their members with better living standards opportunities ; and
 their and provide communities Aboriginal the ; of better opportunities communities and strong building support with that members - living
 opportunities communities the of living Aboriginal that and better standards communities members ; building strong with - their provide support
 building living standards provide communities support communities with better Aboriginal - that and their of ; the members opportunities strong
strengthen the capacity for good government in Aboriginal communities.  
 for government good Aboriginal strengthen the in . capacity communities
 strengthen . good Aboriginal government in for capacity communities the
 Aboriginal communities government the capacity in good for . strengthen
 in good capacity the . strengthen for Aboriginal communities government
 good capacity . for communities Aboriginal in the strengthen government
 Aboriginal communities government . the capacity for good in strengthen
 the good capacity . Aboriginal government in for communities strengthen
 good strengthen capacity . communities government the for in Aboriginal
 in communities good for the government . Aboriginal strengthen capacity
 strengthen . capacity communities good Aboriginal for in the government
 good for the Aboriginal government capacity strengthen in . communities
 in for communities Aboriginal capacity . strengthen good government the
 capacity good for government communities Aboriginal in the . strengthen
 communities Aboriginal in for government strengthen . good the capacity
 . in capacity good for the communities government Aboriginal strengthen
 for strengthen Aboriginal government good capacity . in the communities
The whole history of the public sector, here and elsewhere, is full of such unfortunate incidents. 
I will not speak here about what occurred in Eastern Europe or in the Communist Bloc. 
But in this country and in countries like France and England, such cases have been a constant feature of the past 15 or 20 years.  
You may tell me that such things also happen in the private sector. 
Of course, but in this case it is everybody's money that is at stake, and not just private funds.  
That is why careful consideration must be given to this proposal for a new government structure. 
I am referring to the Investment Board.  
All the contributions will be invested by this so-called Investment Board. 
I would like to start by saying that in 10 years, we will have a government agency managing some $150 billion.  
Do you realize how much power these people will have? 
Every week, every Monday morning when these people arrive at work, they will find in front of them millions and millions of dollars that they will have to invest immediately. 
Three billion dollars is $3,000 million. 
Theoretically, this is $600 million a day. 
This has to be invested right away, it cannot wait until the afternoon.  
Do you think that the heavy machinery required for these operations will be efficient? 
Impossible, honourable senators. 
There will be lost efficiency, which means financial losses. 
Those who believe that "big brother" will be kinder than the community of specialists in the private sector are seriously wrong.  
Even for the private sector specializing in this type of operations, whether mutual funds, national brokerages, or trusts, when the volume exceeds $50 or $60 million, the performance ratio is not proportional to the volume of the funds being managed.  
Private enterprise is aware of that. 
 strengthen the capacity for good government in Aboriginal .
 capacity the strengthen government good communities . Aboriginal in
 . for capacity in good the communities strengthen government
 in Aboriginal the strengthen government for good . communities
To contribute, the Government of Canada is committed to respond to the Report of the Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples as soon as possible.  
 possible of Government is on the contribute to of Aboriginal Canada . as committed , To Peoples the Commission as to soon Royal the Report respond
 the of the contribute respond on . Royal committed as as To Government Report of to Aboriginal , Peoples possible Commission Canada the soon to is
 possible respond Commission to contribute the as Canada of of . Report is on committed Government to the To Peoples the soon as Aboriginal Royal ,
 to Royal to . is as of Report To on soon Peoples , as the respond the Aboriginal of contribute the Commission committed Government possible Canada
 on of Royal committed Canada Aboriginal contribute Government as the the soon Commission Peoples to to of respond the as , is possible To Report .
 of Canada the Report Aboriginal committed of Peoples Royal to Government possible contribute soon the To . on as Commission respond to as , the is
 To Government of as of Canada the soon on committed . is , the Peoples to Royal possible as contribute to the Aboriginal Report respond Commission
 respond committed possible Government of of soon to as , is Royal as the Canada . Report the contribute the to Aboriginal Peoples To on Commission
 respond as Aboriginal possible to To Commission soon is , on Government the of the Peoples as committed the Canada Report contribute to . Royal of
 respond the to is Report Canada as as , committed the of contribute Commission on To Aboriginal Royal to the Government possible . soon of Peoples
 soon Report as the of to Canada Aboriginal committed on the Government Peoples Royal possible of as the To Commission contribute , . is to respond
 respond Canada to of contribute soon possible to Government as on is committed . as To the the , Royal Aboriginal Report of Commission the Peoples
 Government of possible the to , respond the as Canada as To Commission Aboriginal Peoples Royal of Report on is contribute . to the soon committed
 soon is to the respond , Report Aboriginal committed of Peoples possible To of the as Royal Canada to Government the . on contribute Commission as
 as to Government Commission Peoples as Canada of contribute To soon respond the possible of Report Aboriginal to the committed the Royal is , on .
 on of the committed to is possible the Commission contribute Aboriginal Peoples , the as Report Canada soon Royal To of respond Government as to .
Book Launched by Governor General 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
Report of Committee 
Income Tax Conventions Implementation Act, 1997 
Report of Committee 
Present State and Future of Agriculture 
Report of Agriculture and Forestry Committee Tabled 
Present State and Future of Forestry 
Report of Agriculture and Forestry Committee Tabled 
Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration 
Seventh Report of Committee Presented 
ADJOURNMENT 
International Assembly of French-Speaking Parliamentarians 
Meeting held in Luxembourg-Report of Canadian Section Tabled 
Foreign Affairs 
Committee Authorized to Meet During Sitting of the Senate 
The Senate 
Conduct of Business-Notice of Inquiry 
QUESTION PERIOD 
Federal-Provincial Relations 
 To contribute , the Government of Canada is committed to respond to the Report of the Royal on Aboriginal Peoples as soon as possible .
 as committed soon the on Aboriginal is as possible Commission contribute of Royal to of Government Report the to , Canada . the Peoples To
 Commission of on of . to Royal To as contribute is the to as possible Canada Report Aboriginal respond Government Peoples , the soon committed
 the committed Report Peoples on to , . is Canada as Government the To of possible Aboriginal contribute to soon as respond Commission the of
Looking Outward 
 Outward Looking
 Outward Looking
 Outward Looking
 Looking Outward
 Looking Outward
 Outward Looking
 Outward Looking
 Looking Outward
 Outward Looking
 Outward Looking
 Looking Outward
 Looking Outward
 Looking Outward
 Outward Looking
 Looking Outward
 Outward Looking
Do you see any advantage to having decision-making centres such as the firm handling the $25-billion segment being located in different parts of the country?  
Senator Bolduc :
In Quebec, when the problem came up in connection with the pension plan in 1966, we insisted on having our own plan. 
I am not saying that this is how it should be across Canada; that is not my point. 
What I am saying is that, in Quebec, at the time, Jean Lesage had made it very clear that the fund was designed to provide social security. 
That is why we fought so hard for the Caisse de dépôt et placement at the time: to have this flexibility.  
I am not saying this practice should be generalized and extended to Ontario or any other province; it may cause problems I had not thought of so far. 
There is no doubt that it could be more difficult for some provinces. 
I do not exclude however the idea that provincial politicians could bring pressure to bear on this organization so that, when investments are made, people from each region benefit. 
To what extent will ethics and conflict of interest rules be overlooked? 
My experience tells me and I can tell you that it is going to be complicated.  
Hon. Terry Stratton :
Honourable senators, I should like participate in the debate on Bill C-2, the Canada Pension Plan.  
They were informed; and they could understand the information they were being given.  
At the end of every television interview, the finance minister reiterated that, if they did not like the private sector pension plan, they could stick with the public sector pension plan. 
He did this all the way through, for months, until it came time for the people to decide which plan they wanted.  
Within the first six weeks, 25 per cent of the public were in the private pension plan. 
Today, 90 per cent of the public are in the private pension plan, and that plan is doing extremely well. 
Despite the crisis with the Mexican peso, which involves their next door neighbour, their equity market survived, and is, in fact, doing well. 
Investors are getting good returns.  
 Outward
 Outward
 Looking
 Outward
This tradition is the legacy of Nobel laureate and former prime minister of Canada, Lester Pearson, whose 100th birthday we mark this year. 
 Pearson prime This of birthday and Nobel tradition , , we whose the legacy year laureate of Canada this . is 100th former Lester minister mark
 the Nobel 100th , This and year mark laureate Canada we of minister prime Lester . tradition is of Pearson whose this legacy former , birthday
 100th tradition Lester minister laureate we former mark Nobel birthday prime this . Canada , is This the , Pearson whose of and year of legacy
 mark legacy is , this birthday , 100th prime the tradition Canada and Nobel This . Pearson former whose minister Lester we of year of laureate
 whose minister laureate 100th This Nobel and we , former year Pearson birthday Canada is . legacy of this tradition mark , the prime of Lester
 tradition . and , Pearson year minister prime Canada This laureate we , Nobel this the whose is of 100th Lester former of birthday legacy mark
 former tradition , of minister whose laureate 100th prime legacy Nobel is we Pearson . Lester , this mark the of Canada year This and birthday
 we . Nobel whose the Pearson laureate and prime is Canada mark legacy This , former Lester year , minister of birthday this of 100th tradition
 birthday of laureate 100th , prime Canada former tradition year Nobel is Pearson we legacy This Lester and , this the . mark of whose minister
 birthday Nobel This , laureate this legacy 100th . Lester whose and of of year minister is prime tradition , we Canada mark former Pearson the
 This Lester mark , we Nobel former whose prime of of 100th . this tradition Canada the is birthday legacy minister Pearson , and laureate year
 we tradition minister 100th . Nobel year , Canada whose Lester Pearson is prime , the of legacy this former laureate mark birthday of This and
 birthday Lester tradition of , this is of prime we and laureate 100th Nobel former legacy mark the , year Canada Pearson . minister This whose
 and Nobel , minister mark laureate , birthday Pearson . prime Canada whose of the former this legacy is of we tradition year This 100th Lester
 Pearson , Nobel birthday and this year 100th of Lester is former . Canada , the tradition prime of legacy mark minister This laureate whose we
 Nobel prime of this . laureate year This minister , Lester birthday whose tradition Pearson of the mark Canada , 100th and is we former legacy
The Constitution Act, 1867, is amended by adding, immediately after section 93, the following: 
"93A. 
Paragraphs (1) to (4) of section 93 do not apply to Quebec." 
CITATION 
2. This Amendment may be cited as the Constitution Amendment (year of proclamation) (Quebec).  
The special joint committee on which I have the honour to sit was given the mandate of studying the proposed amendment to section 93. 
Today, we have before us the resolution to amend section 93 of the Constitution Act, 1867.  
Briefly put, I support this resolution. 
I am also convinced that the majority of Catholic parents in Quebec who enjoy the guarantees provided under section 93 support this amendment, as do the majority of Protestant parents, who are in the same situation.  
However, the Quebec National Assembly will no longer be subject to legislation predating Confederation with respect to denominational instruction.  
These laws of Quebec that predate Confederation and concern Catholic and Protestant denominational schools have led to the creation of an unusual system, which gave Catholic and Protestant parents different rights, according to where they lived in the province.  
Catholic and Protestant school boards are thus to be found protected by the Constitution within the old limits of Montreal and Quebec City. 
Elsewhere in the province the Catholic school boards are not protected by the Constitution, except in predominantly Protestant districts, where Catholic parents are in the minority.  
Outside Montreal and Quebec City, the Constitution protects Protestant school boards if, in a district with a Catholic majority, the Protestant parents are in the minority.  
Honourable senators, educational reform has been a concern of Quebec governments for over 30 years. 
And one of the subjects that keeps coming back, since the publication of the Parent report in the 1960s, is the establishment of school boards on the basis of Canada's two official languages. 
The ongoing challenge was to reconcile linguistic school boards with the constitutional guarantee protecting Catholic and Protestant school boards in Montreal and Quebec City. 
Even though the Supreme Court approved the system contemplated in Bill 107, the theoretical coexistence of linguistic and denominational school boards proved impracticable.  
Obviously, it is primarily in Montreal that it appears most difficult to set up linguistic school boards without having to support an overlap and interpenetration of structures. 
Lorraine Pagé, of the Centrale de l'enseignement du Québec, testified before the committee that, in Montreal: 
 This is the legacy of Nobel laureate and former prime minister of Canada , Lester Pearson , whose 100th birthday we mark this year .
 the laureate of . and 100th year is mark we whose Canada this Nobel former birthday legacy Pearson This of minister tradition , , prime
 minister is This of this whose legacy former the tradition mark , . year and Pearson of Canada Lester , birthday prime Nobel we laureate
 of tradition and Pearson whose year we former laureate prime . birthday 100th the Lester Nobel is , this minister mark , Canada legacy of
Canadians want their government to carry on this tradition and give it new relevance as the world enters a new century.  
 new government want . this century relevance enters it and world to Canadians give on tradition the new their as a carry
 enters century give to carry it relevance their tradition on . as a government Canadians the want new this new and world
 a it world . to want as government Canadians century enters relevance new tradition carry on and give the this their new
 tradition enters and on as give the new world . relevance this government carry it their Canadians to new a century want
 world the . Canadians on give this tradition a it as relevance their carry to and century want enters new new government
 their on Canadians new it world carry as relevance century government want the and tradition . new enters this give to a
 to new give and Canadians it want on carry a their government relevance as . new enters this century world the tradition
 tradition on this their give relevance government world enters it want and Canadians new as . carry a new to the century
 new as new century and give this their a want relevance carry world Canadians on the tradition enters it government . to
 as and give on carry tradition this . their a the enters want world new relevance government century Canadians it to new
 new want carry to the enters century new it relevance a world tradition . on and their give government this as Canadians
 . as new and world want government enters new their this the to Canadians it give relevance tradition century carry on a
 on carry their Canadians want enters tradition century government it world relevance new the this . give as to and a new
 want their the tradition new as to government give and world relevance this century . on new carry enters a it Canadians
 . century government a it relevance world and carry new give tradition enters as to want the Canadians this on their new
 it give this enters carry world a tradition want their . to new government as the and century new on relevance Canadians
Quebec 
Linguistic School Boards-Amendment to Section 93 of Constitution-Report of Special Joint Committee Adopted 
Quebec 
Linguistic School Boards-Motion to Amend Section 93 of Constitution-Debate Adjourned 
Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration 
Sixth Report of Committee Adopted 
Bill to Amend-First Reading 
Canada Marine Bill 
First Reading 
Aboriginal Peoples 
Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples-Committee Authorized to Study Recommendations 
THE SENATE 
Tuesday, December 9, 1997 
The Senate met at 2:00 p.m., the Speaker in the Chair.  
Prayers.  
Pages Exchange Program with House of Commons 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, before I call for Senators' Statements, I should like to introduce the two pages who are with us this week through the exchange program with the House of Commons.  
They are Anne McCulluch of Calgary, Alberta, who is pursuing studies in journalism at Carleton University.  
Kirk Nangreaves of Saint-Hubert, Quebec, is studying at the University of Ottawa Arts Faculty.  
 Canadians want their government to carry on this tradition and give it new as the world enters a new century .
 world want and give a government new century relevance to it new their as tradition . Canadians on carry the enters
 . to a new their relevance the want new Canadians government century it give tradition as on carry world this and
 new carry this their relevance it as to tradition enters want the Canadians new government a give . on century world
Nothing better illustrates the ongoing commitment to this tradition than Canada's leadership since 1994 in the international effort to ban anti-personnel mines. 
 commitment this s ' ban mines 1994 to leadership the Canada - effort Nothing personnel since ongoing better the illustrates in anti to than international . tradition
 ongoing personnel to Nothing than since mines ban leadership the anti to illustrates commitment better - effort tradition ' in 1994 . s the this international Canada
 better s this - mines Nothing personnel the to ban leadership ongoing anti ' international commitment Canada 1994 illustrates effort in . the tradition since than to
 leadership ban 1994 than effort . Nothing anti mines since s the ' tradition international to in illustrates personnel the better ongoing this to Canada - commitment
 effort ' to commitment Canada s - ongoing tradition the anti illustrates 1994 leadership international personnel better mines to this than Nothing since . the ban in
 mines ongoing since anti - leadership s tradition illustrates the commitment . 1994 better the this ' than Canada to personnel ban effort international in Nothing to
 the mines commitment ongoing illustrates to - ' in better the s . 1994 ban than personnel anti leadership this Canada Nothing effort to international tradition since
 s ' - anti to better personnel 1994 Nothing than illustrates . effort leadership this in tradition to mines Canada the ban since the international ongoing commitment
 personnel commitment better ongoing illustrates anti leadership - Canada to than s the tradition this effort the 1994 since ban to in . ' Nothing international mines
 than mines ban international this leadership anti the personnel to since s ' 1994 tradition illustrates ongoing in to Canada better . the - commitment Nothing effort
 ban . Nothing s the commitment ' to effort the to ongoing better illustrates tradition international this - anti in mines Canada than 1994 since personnel leadership
 the leadership personnel illustrates tradition - anti this since to Nothing effort in mines better ban . ' the ongoing than s to commitment Canada international 1994
 since s effort ' than better this anti tradition ban illustrates mines . Canada the the commitment international in - to ongoing to 1994 Nothing leadership personnel
 Nothing better ' s personnel in leadership . the since to ongoing effort - this the 1994 mines international commitment Canada tradition than to anti illustrates ban
 . Canada the Nothing personnel to international commitment than 1994 ' this to in leadership since effort anti ongoing better - illustrates ban mines tradition the s
 since illustrates this ban than international to better anti the leadership in s 1994 to Canada tradition effort ' ongoing commitment - Nothing the mines . personnel
...an expanded RRSP program; and tax relief to seniors. 
We will argue that our four-pillar plan delivers more retirement income per dollar invested than this three-pillar plan the government is putting forward.  
I think I have explained some of the ideas we got from the government side. 
The liability of $600 billion becomes unfunded if we all quit paying CPP premiums, but the obligations still have to be met. 
That is what Reform was proposing through the election campaign and over the previous four years. 
They have changed. 
Now they want a smaller CPP.  
However, Preston Manning could never explain the first program. 
Now they have a CPP program which they wanted to explain to the minister in committee. 
Well, they could not get it together. 
Preston Manning, who made a promise to do it before committee meetings ended in the other place, failed to do it. 
I can see why.  
They are making false accusations in the House about people. 
It is the typical Reform program we have come to expect. 
They are off in left field somewhere, although I do not think they would want to be described that way.  
Now they want to create a super-RRSP, which does not make any sense because, not only is it at odds with what they said in committee and what they said in the election campaign, it does not fit into their tax plan. 
Remember, they have a tax plan with a flat tax. 
With the flat tax, you reduce the amount of exemptions. 
We are not getting any ideas from them.  
Now I will turn to the Liberals.  
 Nothing better illustrates the ongoing commitment to this tradition than Canada ' s leadership since in the international effort to ban anti - personnel mines .
 Nothing mines to 1994 commitment this leadership ongoing the better international since . personnel illustrates anti ' ban Canada s - the effort to tradition in
 mines since international . in the this the tradition commitment personnel than better anti 1994 ban effort to Canada - leadership Nothing ' illustrates s to
 better the Canada s leadership since - ongoing this anti to the commitment to ban than ' 1994 Nothing effort . personnel illustrates tradition in mines
This Canadian initiative has evolved from a bold idea to be the focus of a large and growing international consensus that will culminate in the signing of an international treaty in Ottawa in December of this year.  
 of an this that This . be a in December a of bold from has Canadian the growing signing treaty culminate Ottawa in idea will year of to international focus initiative in international the consensus and evolved large
 that a year of . Ottawa consensus of a This evolved has will in international focus in the the to growing from treaty this and in of international culminate signing idea bold large December Canadian be initiative an
 Canadian bold consensus year large the This that Ottawa international evolved in initiative of international will signing in growing an from to this be of and idea focus of has culminate . December a a treaty in the
 this evolved focus and idea treaty large be will year consensus of December Ottawa bold in an initiative has a from culminate a of This the that Canadian . of signing in the to growing in international international
 be international and in growing of in December evolved idea This large the consensus in an a international treaty of year focus to that initiative of Canadian a . culminate Ottawa will signing the from has bold this
 in this of initiative in of from idea that has treaty Ottawa and a a in focus December signing Canadian large consensus . of international be evolved the growing international culminate to an the bold This year will
 consensus culminate of evolved be bold a in of of that treaty has December in a will large . an growing this This focus Ottawa signing year from Canadian the international initiative to and international in the idea
 of bold a that growing culminate initiative This year in consensus in the this evolved large international an signing in idea Canadian the from treaty will Ottawa a December focus . be to of and international of has
 that culminate of the has Ottawa the in large focus international signing will initiative consensus year from growing a this a international in of bold an to of Canadian . This December in be treaty evolved idea and
 in . initiative the to Ottawa will and signing the growing a from an international This of evolved December a focus idea in large in that of has culminate consensus year international bold of Canadian this be treaty
 a an international December this has culminate to Ottawa bold focus the from in international and in that Canadian of treaty year This consensus of evolved the growing will idea signing a be large of initiative in .
 an international evolved a signing the has a consensus in Ottawa and treaty of that international This be in Canadian year from . this in growing the initiative culminate bold focus of to large of idea will December
 signing December will an Ottawa of year of international to the in Canadian consensus This a that this from initiative . international in evolved and be has bold large of the focus culminate growing idea treaty a in
 large Ottawa of consensus growing the Canadian December international year of evolved This from culminate signing be bold . international in a the focus in initiative idea and will this to that a in has an of treaty
 an Canadian . of international will that the of be this in in in growing signing evolved to December idea bold and treaty culminate a initiative international from large This the year consensus has focus a Ottawa of
 international of of signing the initiative a international a this in bold December focus and has treaty year that large Ottawa of evolved in Canadian . This an consensus to idea be growing in from culminate will the
I truly appreciate all the support I have received from my colleagues regarding this subject. 
Thanks to all of you.  
History of the Vote in Canada 
Book Launched by Governor General 
Hon. Mabel M. DeWare :
Honourable senators, yesterday, the Right Honourable Romeo LeBlanc, Governor General of Canada, launched an important new book, A History of the Vote in Canada , which recounts how the right to vote has evolved over the past 250 years. 
The book starts at the time of the first elected legislatures in what is now Canada and ends with the most recent federal election. 
It traces changes in voting eligibility, electioneering and voting practices, as well as voter turnout since Confederation. 
Extension of the vote to those who were excluded legally from the franchise, such as women, aboriginal people, religious and racial minorities, is examined in the social context of the period.  
Even though most Canadian adults were eligible to vote by 1920, there is a final chapter that looks at ways to make voting accessible to everyone, including people in all geographic locations and people with physical disabilities.  
A History of the Vote in Canada is meant to be an educational resource and a reminder to Canadians of the significance of the right to vote. 
This is in keeping with Elections Canada's 1993 mandate to educate voters about the democratic right to vote.  
While this book will appeal to historians, political scientists, university and high school teachers and students, it is hoped that it will also reach those who may have difficulty exercising their right to vote.  
As parliamentarians, honourable senators, it is our role to help promote this book and educate our fellow citizens on their rights as voters.  
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
Report of Committee 
Hon. Ron Ghitter , Chair of the Standing Senate Committee on Energy, the Environment and Natural Resources, presented the following report: 
Tuesday, December 9, 1997 
The Standing Senate Committee on Energy, the Environment and Natural Resources has the honour to present its 
SECOND REPORT 
 This Canadian initiative has evolved from a bold idea to be the focus of a large and growing international consensus that will culminate in the signing of an international treaty in Ottawa in December this year .
 evolved focus a in and growing in of initiative to treaty Ottawa culminate will this of has an large that idea international . of Canadian a consensus December be signing in international bold the the This year
 Ottawa in . signing international in the consensus of will a growing from to of evolved this large has international a idea initiative This Canadian December culminate an of that and in focus the year bold be
 treaty December in in be . large a that of growing signing of this international bold Canadian Ottawa the in international will from evolved a and to culminate idea initiative the This consensus has an year focus
Canada's rich and diverse natural heritage is also a source of national pride and international acclaim. 
 and also pride Canada is s and source a diverse heritage ' international national natural rich acclaim . of
 heritage pride Canada acclaim of also natural rich international national a . ' and source diverse is and s
 and national s Canada international rich is of . and heritage a also pride ' source diverse acclaim natural
 heritage diverse natural is of a and . rich acclaim Canada international and source ' s also pride national
 and of national diverse rich a Canada and pride ' international natural s heritage also source . acclaim is
 natural . source and of ' heritage national diverse pride and Canada also rich s is acclaim international a
 . international and is rich Canada a source and natural pride of acclaim heritage ' national diverse also s
 also of is s a rich ' international and diverse national heritage and . pride source Canada acclaim natural
 heritage and rich of natural Canada source . international and acclaim is a ' pride diverse also s national
 rich . is heritage Canada also diverse s pride source and a natural and ' international acclaim of national
 a of ' Canada and also is rich heritage pride natural s diverse international source . acclaim and national
 pride is and rich of diverse heritage source s and also a Canada acclaim natural national ' international .
 Canada national also natural is acclaim of . s heritage diverse rich international source pride and a and '
 national of heritage and also s ' Canada and rich pride is source international diverse natural acclaim a .
 and source also of acclaim pride and a Canada diverse s national international is heritage . rich natural '
 and . national a international rich is diverse acclaim Canada natural also source ' of heritage pride s and
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, my honourable friend would be the first to recognize that it is not appropriate for me to comment on any discussions that took place in cabinet this morning. 
Hon. Lowell Murray :
Would it be appropriate for the honourable minister to let us know whether it was considered last week?  
Senator Graham :
The matter of the helicopters is under active consideration by the government.  
Cabinet met last Thursday. 
Senator Forrestall :
If that is the last cabinet meeting before the Christmas break, I gather we will not see any decision until sometime in the new year.  
Senator Graham :
If that is a question, I would hope my honourable friend is wrong, and that I am correct in saying that it is to be hoped that there will be a decision before the end of this year.  
Senator Forrestall :
Cabinet will meet again, then. 
I am pleased to hear that.  
Search and Rescue Helicopter Replacement Program-State of Sea King Helicopter Fleet-Government Position 
Hon. J. Michael Forrestall :
Where are the other six? 
Are they on ships at sea? 
We have 30 in the inventory.  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
 Canada ' s rich and diverse natural heritage is a source of national pride and international acclaim .
 and diverse natural source a acclaim Canada international and ' s pride rich . national heritage also is
 also Canada and pride is s a source and international ' diverse . heritage of rich national acclaim
 is ' also and a national international diverse heritage source and acclaim . s pride natural Canada of
Canadians are both the beneficiaries and the stewards of a land that holds nine per cent of the earth's fresh water, 10 per cent of its forests, and 25 per cent of its wetlands.  
 of beneficiaries land the cent cent wetlands , nine s water of are per a Canadians holds per per of stewards and its the and 10 that fresh cent earth forests of its the 25 ' both , .
 both and the beneficiaries . its per fresh the that of its s cent of 25 of holds water , per a 10 per earth the cent wetlands cent of and forests stewards , ' nine land are Canadians
 land its stewards wetlands that , earth cent cent water fresh of 10 of and its the Canadians per of s a beneficiaries are holds 25 forests of per the and ' , cent both . nine the per
 the nine of Canadians 10 s holds per both and cent , wetlands the are per . the a 25 that stewards forests of ' cent , and land fresh beneficiaries of water of its cent its earth per
 beneficiaries are cent wetlands , of water s both forests that the of and . per per earth the its cent 10 Canadians holds land its cent a fresh , ' of 25 per nine and the stewards of
 10 , of nine and water both the beneficiaries fresh cent cent earth wetlands and a per forests of land per of holds stewards the ' s . per are 25 that Canadians the cent its its , of
 of ' of its land 25 are and , . per , 10 the cent forests a of per stewards per the the fresh Canadians beneficiaries wetlands earth cent water that nine and of cent s both holds its
 Canadians the holds its fresh the are water . wetlands cent , 25 ' of nine beneficiaries the forests 10 per , per and of cent of both s its and that land earth of cent stewards per a
 earth Canadians that of cent water , , of land a ' per s of the 25 and . 10 per and nine beneficiaries of stewards cent the the wetlands fresh both are forests its holds its per cent
 cent Canadians of s the of per nine land cent per ' that , water are fresh of 10 . holds its , of per the earth both and its stewards forests beneficiaries wetlands a 25 the cent and
 the the forests cent Canadians both a and water , of 25 per per cent its beneficiaries land , wetlands the earth holds . per that nine s cent of and its stewards of of are fresh ' 10
 of forests Canadians s and water 25 the fresh a and stewards cent both of land beneficiaries of , per 10 , cent per nine per the that are cent the . wetlands holds ' its of its earth
 , holds per water , of nine that cent beneficiaries the earth and the forests cent wetlands its s . fresh the ' 25 Canadians stewards its both of cent are 10 per of per and a of land
 . both Canadians cent beneficiaries 10 a of per stewards holds ' per nine , fresh and , of s that wetlands of forests per the its cent cent land the are and earth of water its the 25
 per cent the beneficiaries wetlands of and 25 forests are Canadians earth the ' the of a cent fresh stewards its , of its . holds water nine per land both cent 10 that of , s and per
 land both of per ' . water its s holds and of nine per , 25 earth fresh per cent of the beneficiaries are , the its of cent and that cent the stewards forests a Canadians 10 wetlands
I think that Senator Lavoie-Roux was quite right in saying that minorities often require special protection to be free to exercise their rights. 
But it is possible to limit or remove this special protection with the consent of a majority of this minority.  
It was then a matter of figuring out why a majority of members of these two groups were prepared to relinquish these privileges. 
It is important to point out that representatives of all the groups involved were consulted.  
Be that as it may, honourable senators, this amendment will not spell the end of denominational, be it Catholic or Protestant, education in Quebec. 
The Education Act of this province gives parents the right to choose between Catholic or Protestant denominational education for their children. 
It will be up to parents to decide whether publicly funded denominational education should be maintained indefinitely. 
The fact that the notwithstanding clause was used by the Government of Quebec to protect the existing education legislation seems to indicate, however, that the government reacted favourably to the wish expressed by some parents to maintain Protestant and Catholic denominational schools. 
We have every reason to believe that the place of religion in public education will be subject to a full, open and democratic debate and that the parents' choice will continue to prevail, as it has for so long outside Montreal and Quebec City.  
Throughout the debate that took place before the special joint committee and in this House, we considered the fact that subsection 23(1) of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms does not apply to Quebec and the issue of whether the amendment to section 93 would prejudice the educational rights of native Quebecers. 
Section 23 of the Charter and section 93 of the Constitution Act of 1867 concern educational rights and, instinctively, we might think they are closely linked. 
However, they are not constitutionally related and, in any case it seems entirely ill-advised to reduce consent for constitutional change to a mere transaction where one right serves as a bargaining chip for the improvement of another.  
Honourable senators, I strongly urge you to support this resolution. 
Although we noted there was a consensus to amend section 93, we felt the real issue was the quality of the education of children in Quebec, and on that point opinion was unanimous.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Senator Robichaud, allow me to correct an impression that you left and to ask you a question. 
However, I wanted to make this correction, because you referred to the "government in place", when in fact it was the Liberal government of the day that made the decision, over the objections of the Parti Québécois then in opposition.  
I am asking you the same question I asked Senator Grafstein, but to which I did not get an answer. 
Why is it so important to exempt Quebec from section 93 to allow it to reform its school system? 
What is the connection between the two?  
 Canadians are both the beneficiaries and the stewards of a land that holds nine per cent of the earth ' s fresh water 10 per cent of its forests , and 25 per cent of its wetlands .
 10 both beneficiaries the of nine earth , s that of of . cent per its holds per Canadians are land fresh stewards , cent its and ' of forests water the 25 and cent per the wetlands
 25 stewards of a its cent . Canadians beneficiaries both of earth , holds fresh 10 per of the per and cent the water the per and of land nine , s that wetlands its are forests cent
 , forests of the ' nine of are the its of water cent cent that wetlands . per s 25 and earth a and land its per of the 10 per Canadians stewards cent both fresh beneficiaries holds
Canadians both delight in our magnificent environment and fear for its future. 
 fear future in Canadians magnificent our both for . environment its delight and
 magnificent Canadians delight fear in . for future environment both our its and
 . for our magnificent delight in and both fear future environment its Canadians
 fear magnificent in for . delight its and our future Canadians environment both
 for both its our delight environment Canadians in magnificent future fear . and
 its magnificent our delight for both and in fear . future Canadians environment
 magnificent and fear both delight its future for . in environment Canadians our
 in for . our environment Canadians fear future delight both and magnificent its
 and in fear Canadians environment future . magnificent its both delight for our
 Canadians delight both in its . environment fear our and future for magnificent
 for and both delight future Canadians environment . in magnificent its fear our
 for Canadians fear in our environment and delight future magnificent both . its
 environment fear our for . both its and delight magnificent Canadians in future
 our environment its and future magnificent for Canadians delight fear . both in
 environment fear Canadians in . our future its and both for magnificent delight
 fear Canadians our future for its magnificent in environment both and delight .
They were informed; and they could understand the information they were being given.  
At the end of every television interview, the finance minister reiterated that, if they did not like the private sector pension plan, they could stick with the public sector pension plan. 
He did this all the way through, for months, until it came time for the people to decide which plan they wanted.  
Within the first six weeks, 25 per cent of the public were in the private pension plan. 
Today, 90 per cent of the public are in the private pension plan, and that plan is doing extremely well. 
Despite the crisis with the Mexican peso, which involves their next door neighbour, their equity market survived, and is, in fact, doing well. 
Investors are getting good returns.  
Two lessons are to be learned from that. 
First, a communication plan on the part of the government can sell a fund that is fundamentally sound; and, second, a private pension plan can work.  
Honourable senators, we will have a private pension plan in this country within 10 years, because those "generation X" kids will demand it from us. 
The "excess generation," as the article calls you and I, will have no say in the matter.  
My fundamental point is that there must be a communications plan.  
This bill is seen by many people across the country as nothing more than another tax grab by the Liberal government, a tax grab in the range of $100 billion. 
Imagine bringing in a bill of such magnitude without giving Canadians the opportunity to have input into such dramatic changes to their retirement system as we know it, changes which will dramatically change the three pillars of our pension system, OAS, GIS, and the Canada Pension Plan.  
As I noted in a question to the Leader of the Government in the Senate on October 30: 
My question pertains not to the proposed changes to the Canada Pension Plan but to the government's efforts to sell those changes to Canadians. 
Can the minister report on what the government has spent and what will be spent in the future for communications concerning the Canada Pension Plan, including polling, focus groups, communications, advice and strategy and advertising?  
Other than the simple response that there was a 1-800 number that people could call, I received no response. 
That is what the government determines is a sufficient communications plan for Canadians to understand what the heck is going on. 
That is a travesty. 
 Canadians both delight in our magnificent environment fear for its future .
 Canadians fear and . magnificent for our its future in delight environment
 in its future for fear Canadians both environment . delight and magnificent
 magnificent both environment our in its for fear Canadians delight future .
Maintaining what is good, and improving what has been degraded, requires constant effort. 
 what and , improving Maintaining good . been , has what requires constant is degraded effort
 , effort what is , good Maintaining constant been has . requires and what improving degraded
 and constant , been what , what good degraded improving Maintaining . effort has is requires
 effort degraded , is Maintaining . improving requires been good constant and , has what what
 been requires good and . , degraded constant what , has what is improving Maintaining effort
 what , degraded effort requires Maintaining good improving has what and constant is . been ,
 requires is effort improving been , , constant . what degraded good what has and Maintaining
 has , constant Maintaining , is . what what effort been requires and improving good degraded
 , , is and Maintaining constant has improving effort . been degraded what good requires what
 effort , improving . has Maintaining what is and what constant degraded , good requires been
 is Maintaining has requires degraded effort been and good , , improving what . what constant
 requires is improving has , been constant what what effort good Maintaining . degraded , and
 . constant what has what Maintaining effort is degraded good improving and been , , requires
 Maintaining constant what been and effort , what . has degraded , requires good improving is
 , what requires good Maintaining . degraded effort been is has constant , what and improving
 and , improving effort been . requires constant is has what good Maintaining , what degraded
Motion agreed to.  
The Senate 
Conduct of Business-Notice of Inquiry 
Hon. William M. Kelly :
Honourable senators, I give notice: 
That on Thursday next, December 11, 1997, I will call the attention of the Senate to the way in which the Senate conducts its business.  
QUESTION PERIOD 
Federal-Provincial Relations 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Province of Quebec-Request for Particulars 
Hon. Fernand Roberge :
Honourable senators, my question follows the announcement made yesterday regarding the government's decision to set at $12.5 billion the cash floor for transfer payments made under the Canada health and social transfer (CHST). 
The government would have us believe that this amount represents an increase in health care payments. 
However, the figures indicate otherwise.  
The following year, in 1999-2000, they will only be $3.748 billion. 
Yet, the government claimed yesterday that it was implementing a stable transfer system. 
In fact, cash payments paid to Quebec for health and education will be reduced by over $300 million over a five-year period. 
Honourable senators, I remind you that these cuts are in addition to this year's reduction of $700 million compared to last year. 
Could the minister make inquiries and inform the Senate of the reasons why, in spite of a cash floor set at $12.5 billion, Quebec's share will diminish by $307 million over the next five years?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
The federal government cut its own spending earlier, more drastically and in greater measure than transfers to the provinces. 
 Maintaining what is good , and improving has been degraded , requires constant effort .
 , constant been what requires has degraded Maintaining what , good and effort is .
 what degraded has been good effort improving . is what constant Maintaining requires , and
 improving what requires effort Maintaining constant good what has , , been and . is
It is an effort that the Government will make.  
 is an will make Government that the . effort It
 . that is an will It effort the make Government
 effort . the is an make will It that Government
 an that It is . make the Government effort will
 effort Government an will the that It is make .
 that It Government make . effort the will is an
 . that It an effort is Government will make the
 is Government . effort will that the an make It
 the is an that will . It effort make Government
 . an will make is Government the that It effort
 It that an make effort Government will is the .
 the effort It will that an Government make . is
 Government an the It . effort is make will that
 It . effort that will Government the make an is
 will an . effort is the It make that Government
 Government will effort It an is that the . make
The federal resolution made reference not only to the 1982 Constitution, but to section 23 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedom incorporated in the Constitution Act, 1982.  
I concluded, after listening carefully to legal advice proffered before the committee, that the operative clause of any constitutional resolution was the wording of the amending clause itself. 
While recitals are of interest, while they are opinionated, while they are descriptive, they are not binding.  
Again, it was clear to me that the only way that the federal government could accede to the Quebec assembly's request was by utilizing the 1982 Constitution. 
The Government of Quebec knew this. 
We in Parliament knew this. 
Hence, I and others on the committee insisted that Quebec representatives be invited, despite reports we read in the press to the contrary, that the Quebec representatives would not attend at Ottawa.  
Finally, representatives of the Government of Quebec were invited to attend, which they did, together with members of the opposition. 
They appeared before the committee so that this point and other questions could be addressed.  
Members of the committee were pleased when the Minister of Education, Madame Marois, and the Minister of Federal-Provincial Affairs, Mr. Brassard, accepted our invitation to appear.  
Minister Brassard repeated the well-worn, often-repeated, proposition that no Quebec government will feel bound to recognize the 1982 Constitution. 
Minister Brassard then acknowledged, almost in the same breath, that under the law of the land, under the Supreme Court of Canada, the Province of Quebec was indeed bound by the Constitution Act, 1982. 
This is now clear and unequivocal.  
Clearly and fairly, the Province of Quebec deems itself bound by the 1982 Constitution. 
On the testimony received and based on my personal review, I concluded that the federal government indeed had the power under the 1982 Constitution, section 43, to accede to Quebec's request.  
That Parliament should or would exercise such power was obviously a much more difficult question. 
We recognize, under our Constitution, the nature of the exclusivity of this aspect of education under the Constitution as a provincial matter. 
This question, in pith and substance, is a matter of provincial education within the powers of the Province of Quebec. 
Then, honourable senators, came the more complicated problem alluded to by Senators Wood, Pitfield, Bolduc, Lavoie-Roux and Kirby and Lynch-Staunton, namely, how to determine whether or not, as defenders of the Constitution, we in the Senate could satisfy ourselves that there was a majority of the so-called "minorities" affected by any proposed diminution of their rights or privileges. 
All senators agree that one of our paramount duties in the Senate is to safeguard the Constitution and the rights of the minorities under that Constitution.  
 is an effort that the Government will make .
 an will that effort . the is Government It
 make will an is the . It that Government
 effort an make the Government . It is that
The Government is committed to working in the international community to promote sustainable 
 The is sustainable Government in the working community committed international promote to to
 international in sustainable community promote to to The is committed the working Government
 promote the to to community in sustainable international Government working committed The is
 to sustainable international is community to Government the The in working committed promote
 sustainable international committed community working to the in promote The is to Government
 to in is working The community promote Government the committed international sustainable to
 the Government working is in to to community international The sustainable promote committed
 working promote is to Government to community international the in sustainable The committed
 community to to working in promote The Government the sustainable is international committed
 the The is committed sustainable to community Government international promote to in working
 promote The community international sustainable to working is Government committed in to the
 Government to the committed international to working promote The is community sustainable in
 committed working to Government to The promote sustainable community international is in the
 is working the committed Government community to to in sustainable The international promote
 to sustainable community Government promote international to The is in the committed working
 the committed The is international community working promote Government to in to sustainable
I do not think it is correct, unless there is an urgency, for committees to sit at the same time as the chamber. 
This is not for appearances' sake, but because the work done here can often be as important in the debates as what goes on in committees. 
At various stages of our work - the introduction of bills, second reading, committee referral, then third reading - we are often doing several at the same time. 
Sometimes even two, three or four committees are sitting when we are sitting. 
That is an improper practice.  
If the deputy leader could guarantee to us that, on Wednesdays from now on - and we will strive to be cooperative - we will sit no later than 3:30 p.m., unless there is a proven urgency, then I think Senator Stewart's motion is in order. 
However, we need that assurance first.  
Senator Carstairs :
Let me assure the Leader and Deputy Leader of the Opposition that we will do everything on our part to ensure that sessions end on time. 
We did sit yesterday, which was a Monday. 
I can assure senators we will be sitting next Monday in order to fulfil the business of the chamber before the Christmas break.  
Senator Kinsella :
On that basis, I do not think leave is necessary.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is leave granted?  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
He just felt it was not necessary.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Leave is granted.  
Hon. Senators :
 The Government is committed to working in international community to promote sustainable
 is committed the The in community to international sustainable Government working promote
 to the sustainable community Government is promote working international committed to in
 Government international community working to is promote to committed The sustainable the
development and to achieve practical solutions to global environmental problems, such as greenhouse gas emissions and toxic chemicals. 
 solutions . chemicals as global development such achieve to environmental and and greenhouse , practical problems emissions toxic gas to
 as chemicals to and practical global achieve such development emissions gas and greenhouse toxic to solutions problems . environmental ,
 emissions development gas , as and and . problems solutions achieve greenhouse environmental such toxic to global practical to chemicals
 , environmental as practical and development to greenhouse such and gas achieve toxic to . chemicals solutions problems emissions global
 such achieve , solutions problems emissions development gas environmental and toxic to and to chemicals as greenhouse global practical .
 and such emissions development as solutions chemicals global environmental problems greenhouse and . toxic to gas achieve to , practical
 practical toxic environmental achieve global as emissions . and and such greenhouse chemicals to , development solutions to problems gas
 and solutions such chemicals emissions achieve greenhouse to global to toxic development . as and practical environmental , gas problems
 to environmental development solutions achieve such emissions global and gas problems greenhouse chemicals , to and . toxic as practical
 to such gas solutions toxic emissions as achieve . problems chemicals , and to greenhouse practical global and environmental development
 emissions and , practical such to solutions global environmental . as chemicals and to development achieve toxic greenhouse gas problems
 to as . global emissions practical such , greenhouse chemicals to development achieve environmental gas and and problems solutions toxic
 such chemicals gas solutions . emissions as and achieve global to environmental to and greenhouse , development practical problems toxic
 problems solutions gas , as and to and emissions to environmental chemicals . greenhouse such global practical achieve development toxic
 solutions gas chemicals practical such toxic to as to , . problems emissions global environmental development greenhouse and achieve and
 , environmental global practical chemicals to development . emissions gas greenhouse problems solutions such to achieve toxic as and and
Under the evidence presented to us - not outside the room, but before us - that was clear. 
In that respect, I support the report and the resolution.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
It was moved by the Honourable Senator Pépin, seconded by the Honourable Senator Lucier, that this report be adopted.  
Is it your pleasure, honourable senators, to adopt the motion?  
Motion agreed to and report adopted, on division.  
Quebec 
Linguistic School Boards-Motion to Amend Section 93 of Constitution-Debate Adjourned 
Hon. Fernand Robichaud , for Senator Graham, rose pursuant to notice of Thursday, October 2, 1997: 
Whereas the Government of Quebec has indicated that it intends to establish French and English linguistic school boards in Quebec; 
and whereas the National Assembly of Quebec has passed a resolution authorizing an amendment to the Constitution of Canada; 
and whereas the National Assembly of Quebec has reaffirmed the established rights of the English-speaking community of Quebec, specifically the right, in accordance with the law of Quebec, of members of that community to have their children receive their instruction in English language educational facilities that are under the management and control of that community and are financed through public funds; 
and whereas section 23 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms guarantees to citizens throughout Canada rights to minority language instruction and minority language educational facilities under the management and control of linguistic minorities and provided out of public funds; 
and whereas section 43 of the Constitution Act, 1982 provides that an amendment to the Constitution of Canada may be made by proclamation issued by the Governor General under the Great Seal of Canada where so authorized by resolutions of the Senate and House of Commons and of the legislative assembly of each province to which the amendment applies; 
now therefore the Senate resolves that an amendment to the Constitution of Canada be authorized to be made by proclamation issued by His Excellency the Governor General under the Great Seal of Canada in accordance with the schedule hereto.  
SCHEDULE 
AMENDMENT TO THE CONSTITUTION OF CANADA 
CONSTITUTION ACT, 1867 
The Constitution Act, 1867, is amended by adding, immediately after section 93, the following: 
"93A. 
 development and to achieve practical solutions to global environmental problems , such as greenhouse emissions and toxic chemicals .
 and achieve environmental such , greenhouse to practical chemicals problems global solutions emissions and development toxic gas to as
 . such achieve and environmental chemicals toxic as emissions practical to development problems gas , and to greenhouse solutions
 and , toxic problems practical development as global to emissions . to chemicals and gas solutions greenhouse environmental such
It will also continue to address the serious international problem of overfishing. 
 also will . continue serious international to overfishing of the It problem address
 continue problem of will to the . overfishing also serious address It international
 the overfishing international It will also of address serious . problem to continue
 serious address also . will to international overfishing It the of continue problem
 the also will international serious It address problem overfishing of continue to .
 also overfishing of It serious continue will problem . to the address international
 also continue of to the overfishing problem serious will international . It address
 international overfishing continue to serious problem It will address the of . also
 address problem It . serious continue international the also of to will overfishing
 international also continue will overfishing serious problem . to address of It the
 address to problem of also It international . serious will the continue overfishing
 also It . the overfishing to international of problem serious continue address will
 continue the It . international will of overfishing serious to problem address also
 of will international It overfishing continue problem also . the serious to address
 continue also serious the to overfishing It . of will address problem international
 to address continue the overfishing serious of also It problem . international will
He did this all the way through, for months, until it came time for the people to decide which plan they wanted.  
Within the first six weeks, 25 per cent of the public were in the private pension plan. 
Today, 90 per cent of the public are in the private pension plan, and that plan is doing extremely well. 
Despite the crisis with the Mexican peso, which involves their next door neighbour, their equity market survived, and is, in fact, doing well. 
Investors are getting good returns.  
Two lessons are to be learned from that. 
First, a communication plan on the part of the government can sell a fund that is fundamentally sound; and, second, a private pension plan can work.  
Honourable senators, we will have a private pension plan in this country within 10 years, because those "generation X" kids will demand it from us. 
The "excess generation," as the article calls you and I, will have no say in the matter.  
My fundamental point is that there must be a communications plan.  
This bill is seen by many people across the country as nothing more than another tax grab by the Liberal government, a tax grab in the range of $100 billion. 
Imagine bringing in a bill of such magnitude without giving Canadians the opportunity to have input into such dramatic changes to their retirement system as we know it, changes which will dramatically change the three pillars of our pension system, OAS, GIS, and the Canada Pension Plan.  
As I noted in a question to the Leader of the Government in the Senate on October 30: 
My question pertains not to the proposed changes to the Canada Pension Plan but to the government's efforts to sell those changes to Canadians. 
Can the minister report on what the government has spent and what will be spent in the future for communications concerning the Canada Pension Plan, including polling, focus groups, communications, advice and strategy and advertising?  
Other than the simple response that there was a 1-800 number that people could call, I received no response. 
That is what the government determines is a sufficient communications plan for Canadians to understand what the heck is going on. 
That is a travesty. 
That, to me, is not responsible government whatsoever. 
Can you imagine a prime minister who said that he is a man of the people, a man who is determined to change the way government is done, now ramming through the most dramatic changes to our pension system without informing the Canadian public of just what the government is proposing and allowing input from them?  
 It will also continue to address the international problem of overfishing .
 of serious It continue address will to international overfishing problem . also
 of to the will serious overfishing continue address . It problem international
 of problem address serious It also will to continue overfishing . international
It is committed to acting at home to reduce our contribution to these problems.  
 at is reduce to committed home It . problems acting our these to to contribution
 to home these to problems committed is to our reduce contribution at acting It .
 to It to acting committed . problems at our to these reduce home is contribution
 to these at is acting It problems committed our home contribution to . to reduce
 reduce these committed problems to acting home our . to It at contribution is to
 to home contribution acting to to reduce at . problems is these It our committed
 is home to our problems committed reduce contribution acting to these at . to It
 our to at to . is these contribution committed acting to It reduce home problems
 to these contribution It problems reduce home committed our acting to is . to at
 to to these It at home problems to committed is . reduce contribution our acting
 our home at to to acting to is these . reduce contribution problems committed It
 acting problems reduce at contribution committed is It home . these to our to to
 contribution problems reduce committed at acting these to home to our . is It to
 . home contribution reduce these to committed at to our to It is acting problems
 at committed is reduce problems acting home to our . It contribution these to to
 at . is our contribution It these reduce acting to to problems to home committed
Mr. Chrétien has acknowledged that the federal government would negotiate. 
Could the Leader of the Government in the Senate tell us under what authority the Prime Minister could negotiate?  
Senator Graham :
The Prime Minister would be negotiating on behalf of Canadians, but recognizing at the same time that nine other provinces and the territories are involved. 
I am sure the Prime Minister would take all of that into consideration.  
Senator Nolin :
The Supreme Court received the request from your government to decide on the issue of Quebec's secession. 
We will learn in all likelihood from the Supreme Court that the amending formula would be appropriate if Canadians agreed to allow one province to separate from the others. 
Have the Prime Minister, the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs or officials of your government had formal or informal discussions on this matter with the representatives of the nine other provinces?  
Senator Graham :
Not that I am aware, honourable senators. 
We are aware, of course, of the meetings that took place with the premiers in Calgary. 
We know there is a first ministers' conference later this week in Ottawa, at which this matter may or may not arise. 
However, I am not aware that there have been discussions, either formal or informal, between the Prime Minister and the premiers up to this point in time.  
Immigration 
Tracking and Detention of Unsuccessful Refugee Claimants-Government Position 
Hon. Donald H. Oliver :
Honourable senators, my question to the Leader of the Government in the Senate is a continuation of the line of questions I had for the honourable leader yesterday. 
Will the Leader of the Government tell this chamber what plans are being considered to detain those who are dangerous, or who are judged to be unlikely to depart of their own free will? 
Where will they be detained, and under what controls to ensure that Canadians are protected?  
 It is committed to acting at home to reduce contribution to these problems .
 contribution is at acting It reduce our . problems to committed home these to
 to to reduce problems . is It contribution these acting committed at to home
 It . problems committed is reduce home these contribution to to our to acting
In this same Canadian tradition of internationalism, the Government will undertake the following initiatives: 
 undertake this tradition will Canadian of : the same , Government the following In internationalism initiatives
 Government internationalism : the tradition will following this , initiatives the same undertake Canadian In of
 initiatives the same , will : undertake Canadian following this Government of tradition In the internationalism
 the same initiatives Canadian internationalism : Government the this of , In following will tradition undertake
 of , undertake will : following Canadian Government the internationalism initiatives same In the this tradition
 In : this of , Government following internationalism Canadian tradition the the will initiatives same undertake
 : , internationalism same Canadian of In the Government tradition undertake this the initiatives following will
 same initiatives tradition undertake this Government following Canadian the , In will the : internationalism of
 following the initiatives this same Canadian the : of undertake In internationalism will tradition Government ,
 internationalism tradition initiatives : this the Canadian of undertake following , will same the In Government
 Canadian this initiatives the same internationalism , will the of following In undertake tradition Government :
 the initiatives undertake Government the : tradition of following internationalism Canadian this , same will In
 the this internationalism initiatives : same tradition Government , undertake In of the Canadian will following
 same Canadian undertake , will of In tradition following initiatives the the internationalism : Government this
 will this same Government undertake the : of In , tradition initiatives Canadian following internationalism the
 Canadian of the In same will following undertake initiatives , tradition Government internationalism : this the
Experts in constitutional law have said that the amendment could have a surprising impact, far beyond the limited effects usually referred to in the media. 
The public may have trouble grasping the real scope of what is happening or making its views known because it does not have access to the necessary information and means of communication. 
It must therefore be acknowledged that if Parliament grants the request, public support for the amendment is less certain than support for the creation of linguistic school boards....  
Bill 109 - 
- which is the Quebec Education Act passed in June - 
- upholds the principle of freedom of choice in schooling. 
However, the debates of the Joint Committee of the House of Commons and Senate highlighted the fact that the legislation in this area will be jeopardized the moment Quebec is excluded from the application of subsections 1 to 4 of section 93. 
The Committee therefore believes that the amendment could turn out to be something of a time bomb unless the Quebec government is prepared to renew the notwithstanding clauses or look for a better alternative that would allow it to retain in practical terms its authority to enact legislation on denominational schools....  
Finally: 
The Catholic Committee therefore strongly urges the Government of Quebec to immediately find a legal provision, constitutional or otherwise, that would allow it to strike a balance between the requirements of the Charters, including the requirements of section 41 of the Quebec Charter, and the legitimate expectations expressed by the public. 
Such a provision would rid the government of the dilemma described above concerning the use or elimination of the notwithstanding clauses. 
More importantly, it would allow a genuine democratic debate over a new social pact in the area of religious education.  
Given their authorship, I think we have to reflect seriously on these thoughts.  
Before we finally vote, honourable senators, I trust that when the resolution itself is before us we can go into Committee of the Whole to hear any witness who was not heard by the joint committee and whose reflections will guide us. 
In particular, I refer to the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs who, after all, is the sponsor of this resolution on behalf of the Government of Canada. 
He is as well placed as anyone to reply to concerns expressed here and elsewhere. 
I would expect that he would welcome the opportunity to do so before a vote is taken.  
I feel strongly that the minister must share his views with this house and engage in an open and frank exchange directly with its members. 
I urge the leadership on the other side to arrange such a meeting at the earliest opportunity.  
There are still too many unanswered questions and disturbing uncertainties for many senators on both sides of this house to state a firm position at this time. 
 In this same Canadian tradition of internationalism the Government will undertake the following initiatives :
 Canadian tradition this same the of will the initiatives In following internationalism : , undertake
 will this , same internationalism of tradition Government In the : undertake the Canadian initiatives
 same this : tradition , In initiatives Canadian internationalism the Government the of undertake following
It will promote Canadian values on the world stage by cooperating with like-minded countries to revitalize the United Nations and other key multilateral institutions. 
 to world values on key the the - United countries Canadian minded like will multilateral with Nations revitalize other stage cooperating and institutions . promote by It
 on It by with to Nations Canadian key the . like - world will and the revitalize institutions promote multilateral other minded stage United cooperating countries values
 revitalize United . with Nations by like minded key cooperating It promote will Canadian multilateral and the other stage on values institutions - countries to world the
 Nations Canadian other cooperating multilateral and key values will to stage on world United - the with promote by minded . like countries institutions revitalize the It
 will . - institutions cooperating the United the and on by key Nations values to multilateral countries world other with stage like It revitalize Canadian minded promote
 values cooperating and other institutions to promote with . key United world stage revitalize by the countries minded Nations like on Canadian multilateral will the It -
 will stage minded like . on United institutions world It key the the - cooperating countries promote with values other Canadian and revitalize multilateral by Nations to
 other with It - promote institutions multilateral stage Canadian . cooperating world values to and on key the minded revitalize countries by the like Nations United will
 . stage - key on Nations promote like Canadian will It minded with and United values multilateral revitalize world other institutions countries to by cooperating the the
 minded the key countries will on other It United . like world values institutions the multilateral - with to Nations stage revitalize by and promote cooperating Canadian
 Nations the promote with key cooperating world to and stage by will countries . United on - other like revitalize institutions values multilateral the minded It Canadian
 other will . promote revitalize the and like world the countries institutions key stage - United minded Canadian multilateral Nations values by with to cooperating on It
 like by United other with multilateral minded institutions stage . countries to the promote Nations key cooperating and - It will Canadian the revitalize values on world
 the . world promote values and by other United countries with to key minded - like revitalize institutions Canadian multilateral the Nations will cooperating It on stage
 cooperating will with on promote minded values key countries institutions to by multilateral Canadian United Nations the the revitalize world stage It and . - other like
 on Canadian cooperating revitalize promote values to stage by United institutions will world countries key multilateral and minded the It Nations with the . like other -
National Unity 
Recent Remarks of Prime Minister-Possible Conditions of Secession of Quebec-Government Position 
Hon. Pierre Claude Nolin :
Honourable senators, I would like to return to the matter of the Prime Minister's statement last weekend on Quebec's secession. 
He said in fact last week in Quebec City that he would be prepared to negotiate Quebec's separation, if certain conditions were met.  
I would first like to know what conditions the Prime Minister was referring to?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, the Government of Canada has always said that Quebecers would not be kept within Canada against their will. 
That being said, breaking up a country is not a step that one would take lightly. 
Senator Graham :
The will of Quebecers to leave must be clearly expressed. 
In addition, of course, any process that would lead to secession must respect the law.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
What does the law say on secession?  
Senator Graham :
The government has asked the Supreme Court of Canada to rule on the legality of unilateral secession.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
I had thought that Mr. Dion answered that question himself on the weekend when he said that a UDI would be illegal.  
Senator Nolin :
The Prime Minister has said he was prepared to negotiate. 
 It will promote Canadian values on the world stage by cooperating with like minded countries to revitalize the United Nations and other key multilateral institutions .
 other cooperating world the to It Nations values promote the - minded United key countries with on and like revitalize . Canadian stage institutions multilateral by
 United institutions the key will with cooperating minded by revitalize Nations Canadian on the . to - and countries other multilateral stage like It world promote
 institutions Canadian cooperating - the will stage by key like other multilateral values countries the and with revitalize It on world to Nations . promote minded
It will work directly with other countries to enhance and promote human rights, peace building and democracy.  
 , and to countries peace with . directly promote and will work rights human enhance democracy It building other
 peace directly human work rights enhance with . promote It and , other democracy to and building will countries
 and to peace promote other rights enhance building directly countries human work , and with It . will democracy
 promote building directly enhance human to It peace . will democracy , rights and work and other with countries
 countries with promote work building other It . and human and , will peace enhance democracy rights to directly
 promote and countries , democracy with to directly . building and rights peace other will It human enhance work
 with will promote peace work democracy enhance and , other and to directly . building human It countries rights
 promote building democracy will other and human to countries . It directly with , and peace enhance rights work
 , . other and countries building human work promote with directly will to It enhance democracy peace rights and
 democracy human and peace will other rights countries It promote and building enhance , . directly work with to
 peace building It . with enhance and will and human democracy work countries promote to rights directly other ,
 work will other rights and democracy building enhance with , human and . peace promote It countries to directly
 and countries other democracy with , building directly to promote rights work enhance . peace human It and will
 enhance human and and peace to directly promote building . , democracy countries with work rights other It will
 It to rights human , democracy countries enhance will directly other peace . and and promote work building with
 and enhance rights building democracy work other will countries with peace and directly promote to human , . It
I will quote Senator Meighen, who said: 
It has been 51 days!  
On November 25, I said the following: 
In a paper released the week prior to November 25, the Association of Canadian Pension Management said that the Seniors Benefit will stifle savings. 
To quote from their paper: 
Middle-income Canadians might simply decide to supplement government programs through the accumulation of non-income producing capital, such as homes or interest-free mortgages for their children. 
They may simply avoid retirement savings plans that generate heavily taxed income...  
They go on to suggest that Ottawa structure the Seniors Benefit in such a way that it will not result in an effective tax rate in excess of 50 per cent.  
Was the government listening when I asked that question? 
Senator Graham said, "Of course, yes." 
Did the Leader of the Government in the Senate read The Financial Post editorial that morning in which it was recommended that this problem be changed to reflect such an issue? 
From what I understand, in the other place all amendments have been struck down and no further amendments are coming forward. 
As we know, no amendments were passed.  
Changes to pension legislation represents one of the largest issues facing seniors as they move into retirement. 
Seniors, as a whole, do not know about these changes. 
Has the government developed a communications plan to inform Canadians of this issue prior to the passage of this bill? 
To that inquiry, Senator Graham replied, "Yes." 
He also said that this was a matter to which I had referred before, and that there are 1-800 lines available. 
He said that that was the communication plan on the part of the government.  
The crux of this whole taxation matter came about on November 26, when I asked the following question of the Leader of the Government in the Senate: 
 It will work directly with other to enhance and promote human rights , peace building and democracy .
 will democracy other promote work enhance building peace rights and human with It directly and to countries .
 human will work It countries , directly peace and rights with building . to enhance and democracy promote
 peace directly , work and countries promote It will other with rights human to democracy enhance and .
It will destroy the Department of National Defence's stock of land mines, in advance of the signing of the Ottawa Treaty in December, to continue its leadership and illustrate its commitment to a global ban. 
 It , its ' . Defence its mines advance of the of stock illustrate ban global National commitment of the s the leadership Ottawa destroy in in continue land signing , a Treaty December Department and will to to of
 the in of a Ottawa in to continue . destroy and , global stock It the of , ban Department ' Treaty will signing National advance land s mines of December illustrate leadership the of Defence its commitment its to
 the in and will the National commitment global . destroy Ottawa , the continue Treaty ' stock of It a of to mines December advance , of s Department leadership of ban Defence its land signing in illustrate its to
 the ' and Treaty to , destroy signing mines advance of leadership stock the in December to s ban It Ottawa in global the of Department a commitment its National , its . of land continue will Defence illustrate of
 advance ' the December commitment , mines signing of will continue ban leadership in a its to in . illustrate destroy stock Defence the s of of land global , National Department Ottawa the It of its and to Treaty
 , to , a its National stock in to . the of land signing of Defence December and of Treaty global illustrate Department It in its continue will s the ' Ottawa commitment the leadership of mines destroy advance ban
 will the ban stock advance National of to Treaty the It Department destroy , its in global , its a . of land continue to Defence s signing leadership December of commitment and Ottawa of in illustrate ' the mines
 advance the of its its a ' destroy s in to ban and Defence of Department illustrate to Treaty commitment . , continue stock It of global land mines National signing in of Ottawa , leadership will December the the
 illustrate commitment of ban the the signing . of to land global , , in December its will Treaty It to and a stock leadership Defence Department National continue s mines in of ' its Ottawa advance destroy of the
 Defence to and of destroy its in , Department Treaty of global mines land to , illustrate It the the commitment ' advance will its of Ottawa . December leadership s a ban the signing National stock continue of in
 to and global advance of ' leadership of continue mines in signing the National . illustrate December Defence in , destroy stock land It the its s ban , a the Treaty commitment of will Ottawa Department its to of
 a of s land the and advance stock the Defence Treaty of mines signing ' It the , commitment in will Department , of National to in destroy December global its leadership continue . of ban its to illustrate Ottawa
 December the destroy in ' its leadership It signing Ottawa of commitment advance a and , illustrate will mines land Department Defence Treaty stock the . in its of , continue s ban to of to global the National of
 the of It of in December a the ban stock the continue land Treaty to of leadership Ottawa in s commitment destroy will to its . signing , mines Defence global National and its advance , Department illustrate of '
 , National land the leadership . to mines s stock in global of its will It illustrate its , ban the Defence signing to ' destroy of Ottawa a in Department commitment of the continue and Treaty of advance December
 of ' destroy Defence . of advance ban of in leadership Department Ottawa the to s continue Treaty mines the commitment will the land , its its stock signing a and December It , in National to of illustrate global
I used to joke that these were the first constitutional amendments in history to have been negotiated over the telephone.  
Let it be noted that Mr. Chrétien takes pride of authorship - "of modifying the principle of minority education...". 
He boasts of getting the agreement of then Prime Minister Trudeau and the nine other premiers, and finds it amusing that this inexcusable abandonment of a fundamental principle was secured over the telephone.  
Honourable senators, Quebec's partial exemption from section 23 was initiated and approved by Mr. Chrétien by including the following in the Constitution Act, 1982: 
59(1) Paragraph 23(1)( a ) shall come into force in respect of Quebec on a day to be fixed by proclamation issued by the Queen or the Governor General under the Great Seal of Canada.  
(2) A proclamation under subsection (1) shall be issued only where authorized by the legislative assembly or government of Quebec. 
Section 23(1)( a ), from which Quebec is exempted by the authors of the Constitution Act themselves, requires that Canadian citizens: 
Finally, I want to comment on the notion of joint committees, particularly those charged with studying a particular item within a given period. 
It was said here, and repeated before the committee, that participation by the Senate must not be interpreted as an abandonment by it of the obligations imposed on the Senate in matters of constitutional amendments. 
It is true that, alone, we cannot defeat an amendment of this nature, as the Senate may be overruled by the House of Commons. 
However, as was shown in the case of the first Term 17 resolution, although the Senate impact on a constitutional amendment is limited, its efforts in this regard can be most constructive. 
I am convinced that if the amendments to it, which the Senate forwarded to the House, had been accepted, Parliament would not be faced with a second Term 17 resolution as it is now, as the Senate amendments satisfied the affected minorities while respecting the Government of Newfoundland's objectives.  
The joint committee was not given enough time to review the Quebec resolution with the care it deserved. 
Witnesses were impressive in numbers, but time restrictions affected their presentations, and questions and answers were too often incomplete when they were not cut short. 
Joint committees of this sort benefit the government, not Parliament, as they are limited in both latitude and independence by the government's control over their agenda. 
This is not meant as a reflection on the work done by the co-chairmen or those who participated on the committee, who I again thank for their excellent work, in particular the co-chairmen, for they toiled under difficult circumstances. 
It is a comment on the concept itself and one, I gather, which can also be applied to the joint committee which has just completed its study of the proposed amendment to Term 17.  
Should joint committees become the rule rather than the exception, and two-thirds of the membership is drawn from the House of Commons, how can one expect sober second thought to win even persuasive arguments? 
That is why it is essential that a constitutional amendment be thoroughly reviewed by the Senate, otherwise we will be party to the Commons always having its will on us.  
The following, taken from the joint committee report, was not included as an afterthought, I can assure honourable senators: 
 It will destroy the Department of National Defence ' s stock of land mines , in advance of the signing of the Ottawa Treaty in December , to continue its leadership and its commitment to a global ban .
 commitment Department the and advance leadership to It of National of will the Ottawa its its stock December of s a illustrate in mines destroy ' Treaty . land in , , the of signing continue global Defence ban
 leadership mines commitment s ' Department Ottawa the advance illustrate of ban signing continue in National , to the of and the , . December of Defence global destroy to its stock It of a in Treaty land will
 signing of illustrate Ottawa the leadership in stock and the , commitment continue land of Treaty National in its the will . advance destroy s Defence ban Department to ' of to a global , It mines its December
And Canada will continue to work toward an accompanying international strategy to help land mine victims recover and civilian populations reclaim their land from these mines.  
 And . and these land reclaim land strategy populations work mine recover toward their accompanying from mines to civilian victims will international continue help Canada to an
 Canada and mines And work mine land recover civilian an help accompanying land populations victims from these to toward their international will continue reclaim . strategy to
 these reclaim civilian victims toward mines recover mine their work international populations to and And strategy accompanying help Canada will to land continue . an land from
 Canada accompanying mines reclaim will and their these work help from populations And mine an international land to . to land victims civilian strategy toward recover continue
 land work accompanying . reclaim their to land civilian victims and these will strategy And recover continue an mine from to toward mines help Canada international populations
 help victims toward recover reclaim their civilian and from an populations accompanying will And to work mine international land strategy mines Canada . land to these continue
 to and help civilian reclaim will their strategy land from Canada . an accompanying land mines And mine work continue international populations recover toward to these victims
 work . to these toward an mine will accompanying strategy mines Canada and land international And populations from reclaim to recover help land continue their civilian victims
 international work mine from to recover strategy reclaim land toward their an accompanying help will And victims and continue to these land Canada populations . mines civilian
 to mines from reclaim recover populations help continue strategy accompanying Canada an and toward will these victims land their mine . civilian work land to international And
 civilian land mines victims mine international their and strategy . an populations continue land from these to work toward recover to reclaim accompanying will help And Canada
 from mines help land to strategy . an And victims international reclaim and accompanying populations their toward civilian work mine will land continue Canada to recover these
 civilian mines work victims . from help to toward and mine strategy And international land to will recover these an continue land accompanying their Canada reclaim populations
 mine accompanying populations strategy . these work international recover will And to and from an civilian their toward land continue victims help mines reclaim to land Canada
 victims an mine continue to recover Canada strategy and civilian populations mines reclaim will toward work to accompanying international these And land their land . help from
 accompanying reclaim to mine from mines help strategy continue . populations their land these land international Canada and work an And victims toward recover civilian will to
What is the connection between the two?  
Senator Robichaud :
Let me give you my version of the facts. 
When we heard witnesses from Quebec, including school board officials, parents and teachers, some of them told us that, in its present form, section 93 brings about a superimposition of structures, particularly in the Montreal region. 
These people told us that this was preventing authorities from providing the best possible services. 
These people also told us they wanted the resolution to be passed before the end of the year so they could start long-term planning. 
They would really appreciate having some time to implement these changes.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
I do not want to unduly prolong the debate, but I have another question for Senator Robichaud. 
Since we did not get answers to certain questions, would you agree to invite the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs, who is the sponsor of this resolution, to appear before the Senate in committee of the whole? 
We would like him to give us certain assurances before we make a decision on this issue?  
Senator Robichaud :
Honourable senators, the minister who is the sponsor of the resolution has already appeared before the joint committee. 
He came at the beginning and at the end of the hearings, and my honourable colleague was there to ask him questions on the issues that were of concern to him.  
If the honourable senator did not get answers to all his questions, that is an entirely different matter. 
On motion of Senator Kinsella, for Senator Simard, debate adjourned.  
Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration 
Sixth Report of Committee Adopted 
The Senate proceeded to consideration of the sixth report of the Standing Committee on Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration (budgets for certain committees), presented in the Senate on December 4, 1997.  
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) :
 And Canada will continue to work an accompanying international strategy to help land mine victims recover and civilian populations reclaim their land from these mines .
 . land their an to accompanying work strategy victims these and And recover will help to mine international from land continue reclaim civilian Canada toward populations
 help victims Canada toward their international to mines continue to from And populations land recover reclaim work . land and these mine strategy civilian accompanying will
 continue help will Canada from mine mines and populations reclaim land recover strategy toward And international an work victims accompanying . these land to civilian their
It will continue to move forward with reforms to the Canadian military.  
 Canadian military reforms It to to will forward the with move continue .
 will reforms to continue move with . It the Canadian military to forward
 to Canadian continue the . will move to with forward military reforms It
 It will with Canadian military to continue the . forward reforms to move
 It . the Canadian military to will with move continue reforms forward to
 to to move with . It reforms will the military forward Canadian continue
 to continue move . reforms Canadian It will to military forward with the
 reforms . with forward will military move It the continue to to Canadian
 military . to to It the Canadian reforms will with continue move forward
 the Canadian forward to military . reforms move continue It to will with
 to forward . move military with It the to Canadian will reforms continue
 Canadian will forward the It continue move reforms military to to with .
 Canadian continue It forward move to will to with military the reforms .
 to reforms to It . with continue will Canadian the forward move military
 . will continue the with move military reforms to forward Canadian to It
 move to the reforms continue It with . military forward will Canadian to
4. I would like to have these points clarified but not in the media. 
I truly appreciate all the support I have received from my colleagues regarding this subject. 
Thanks to all of you.  
History of the Vote in Canada 
Book Launched by Governor General 
Hon. Mabel M. DeWare :
Honourable senators, yesterday, the Right Honourable Romeo LeBlanc, Governor General of Canada, launched an important new book, A History of the Vote in Canada , which recounts how the right to vote has evolved over the past 250 years. 
The book starts at the time of the first elected legislatures in what is now Canada and ends with the most recent federal election. 
It traces changes in voting eligibility, electioneering and voting practices, as well as voter turnout since Confederation. 
Extension of the vote to those who were excluded legally from the franchise, such as women, aboriginal people, religious and racial minorities, is examined in the social context of the period.  
Even though most Canadian adults were eligible to vote by 1920, there is a final chapter that looks at ways to make voting accessible to everyone, including people in all geographic locations and people with physical disabilities.  
A History of the Vote in Canada is meant to be an educational resource and a reminder to Canadians of the significance of the right to vote. 
This is in keeping with Elections Canada's 1993 mandate to educate voters about the democratic right to vote.  
While this book will appeal to historians, political scientists, university and high school teachers and students, it is hoped that it will also reach those who may have difficulty exercising their right to vote.  
As parliamentarians, honourable senators, it is our role to help promote this book and educate our fellow citizens on their rights as voters.  
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
Report of Committee 
Hon. Ron Ghitter , Chair of the Standing Senate Committee on Energy, the Environment and Natural Resources, presented the following report: 
Tuesday, December 9, 1997 
The Standing Senate Committee on Energy, the Environment and Natural Resources has the honour to present its 
 It will continue to move with reforms to the Canadian military .
 move reforms the Canadian It continue forward will to . to military
 Canadian . continue reforms will It forward the with to to military
 the It to . with will continue forward move reforms to Canadian
It will continue its campaign for liberalized trade. 
 its continue It liberalized trade . campaign will for
 . liberalized for its will campaign continue It trade
 campaign for continue liberalized its trade will . It
 will trade liberalized continue . It its campaign for
 for campaign continue will its trade It liberalized .
 for will continue It . its campaign liberalized trade
 It continue campaign . trade its liberalized will for
 It liberalized its . for will trade campaign continue
 It trade for will campaign its . liberalized continue
 It campaign its liberalized continue will for trade .
 . It will campaign its continue for trade liberalized
 continue will trade . liberalized its campaign for It
 its for campaign continue trade will It liberalized .
 It will campaign liberalized for continue trade . its
 It . trade will campaign for its continue liberalized
 trade its It for will campaign liberalized . continue
Every year, we save $80 billion, or 10 per cent of the gross national product, which goes to income security, including $22 billion from old age pensions, $23 billion from the Canada pension fund and $30 billion or $35 billion from private pension plans. 
Savings coming from private pension plans should remain stable in the future or else get smaller depending on the decisions we make. 
Contributions will increase by 70 per cent within five to seven years. 
I think the amounts will remain stable, but they could also drop, if this increase is not compensated by an equivalent decrease in income tax, for instance.  
As for RRSPs, they are likely to diminish if employment insurance contributions and taxes are not lowered.  
In my opinion, we will likely see a reduction in private savings, along with an increase in public savings. 
Is it a good thing to increase the role of the state? 
This is what is being done here. 
It implies that if it is in the public domain, the money will be better invested than if individuals invest their savings in the private sector. 
Who can possibly think that it makes sense?  
What happened in the past? 
Can it be said that the government was more cautious than individuals in the management of its funds? 
I am not blaming one government in particular, but the public sector's attitude is often like that. 
I simply note that this is the way things have been done for 40 years.  
Did the government display more shrewdness in the management of business investments? 
Look at the performance of crown corporations. 
Air Canada, CN and Canadair all did well after being privatized. 
In other words, good management started once the government was no longer involved.  
So, we should be cautious before giving the public sector increased responsibilities for the management of funds. 
We must be careful before transferring money from the private to the public sector.  
 will continue its campaign for liberalized trade .
 trade . campaign will liberalized for its continue
 campaign It liberalized its for continue will .
 liberalized trade campaign continue for . will It
Breaking down trade barriers, both within Canada and around the world, helps ensure markets for Canadian goods and services and provides the best opportunity for greater prosperity.  
 around Canada barriers . within ensure opportunity and both down helps the world for markets greater trade , prosperity and Canadian goods best Breaking for services the provides and ,
 Canada within , Breaking the prosperity and provides world best Canadian down both opportunity helps and , goods barriers trade the markets services . greater around ensure for for and
 world the provides helps barriers and opportunity Canada , services within the for down around and Canadian Breaking markets for and both . best greater , trade prosperity ensure goods
 markets , and down both prosperity trade opportunity and the barriers ensure world for Canada , around best within greater Breaking services helps goods Canadian and for provides . the
 and best goods markets around for within for , . the opportunity world Breaking and prosperity services barriers provides ensure trade and Canadian greater down both , Canada helps the
 services around down and within . , the both best world ensure for for and provides markets opportunity helps Breaking Canada trade and goods the barriers , greater prosperity Canadian
 best trade and barriers world Breaking markets goods opportunity , and . helps greater prosperity within provides around services both Canadian , the for ensure for the down and Canada
 best Canadian world around barriers greater the both down the for helps markets Breaking trade , and within provides prosperity , and services goods and Canada ensure opportunity . for
 opportunity goods Canada barriers services , trade both , the and prosperity greater for within for ensure down and the around provides and Breaking . world helps Canadian best markets
 prosperity for goods for down world opportunity provides trade both and Canada the and ensure the , within services barriers greater helps . and Breaking best , around markets Canadian
 Canadian the Breaking for prosperity best within services , down provides world markets , greater and trade opportunity ensure . and barriers both and for goods helps around Canada the
 and the services goods Canada and . around Canadian , both barriers greater within trade markets ensure opportunity provides and helps Breaking for down the best world , prosperity for
 for ensure best for the prosperity trade the Canadian , goods around and within opportunity services both world and and provides Breaking down barriers , . Canada helps markets greater
 Canada . Canadian the goods world helps greater services prosperity provides around markets opportunity and barriers for ensure for within and Breaking the both trade and , , down best
 for ensure Canadian for goods barriers , within , around opportunity down and provides the . world the and Canada and helps trade markets Breaking greater prosperity best services both
 prosperity . world barriers for services and and down around Canadian trade best within ensure Canada helps , Breaking , and both goods opportunity greater the the markets provides for
Debate adjourned to await the ruling of the Speaker. 
Quebec 
Linguistic School Boards-Amendment to Section 93 of Constitution-Report of Special Joint Committee Adopted 
On the Order: 
Resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Pépin, seconded by the Honourable Senator Lucier, for the adoption of the Report of the Special Joint Committee to Amend Section 93 of the Constitution Act, 1867 concerning the Quebec School System, deposited with the Clerk of the Senate on November 7, 1997.  
Hon. John Lynch-Staunton (Leader of the Opposition) :
Honourable senators, I would like first of all to thank the co-chairmen of the joint committee, our colleague Senator Lucie Pépin, and the other co-chairman, MP Denis Paradis, for their excellent work in rather exceptional and sometimes trying circumstances.  
In fact, as has been said here and elsewhere, considering the decision of the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs that government support for the amendment to section 93 of the Constitution was already an established fact and that the government majority in committee left no doubt as to what conclusions it would reach, the committee's role could have been limited to that of a rubber stamp.  
Furthermore, the committee was not allowed to hold hearings outside Ottawa and was required to table its report no later than November 7, 1997, with only three weeks to hear witnesses and prepare its report. 
What a contrast with the extremely slow process followed by many less important bills that gather dust for months on parliamentary shelves before receiving Royal Assent.  
In his November 27, 1997 speech, Senator Wood gave a very good description of the strait-jacket in which the joint committee had to work. 
Everything was rushed. 
No announcements were made that hearings were being held, contrary to what is usually done. 
The list of witnesses changed almost from hour to hour. 
Some witnesses had only a few hours' notice that they would be appearing before the committee, and their presentations suffered as a result, as they said themselves.  
Under such conditions, it was quite normal that participation in the committee could have been interpreted as sanctioning the conditions imposed by and for the government. 
However, this was an issue that was worth risking this false interpretation, because the Parliament of Canada is dealing with a request from the Quebec National Assembly, with its sovereignist majority, to exempt Quebec from certain constitutional obligations it has had to live with for 130 years.  
Unfortunately, there was not enough time to involve the committee in preparatory briefings in order for it to have as complete an appreciation and understanding as possible of all the implications of Quebec's resolution. 
As a result, it tended to stray from the substance of the reference before it. 
"Religious education," "religious instruction," "denominational schools," "confessional schools," "linguistic rights," "minority rights" and other terms were used so often that they tended to become interchangeable to the point that they occasionally melded together.  
 Breaking down trade barriers , both within Canada around the world , helps ensure markets for Canadian goods and services and provides the best opportunity for greater prosperity .
 Canada services down the best world . markets , , Canadian goods trade and both the helps within opportunity ensure and Breaking prosperity greater provides for around for and
 services provides best and Breaking barriers for opportunity Canada for both and and within , prosperity . around ensure helps Canadian greater goods the world the trade down ,
 the ensure world provides Canada within Canadian trade barriers . both for prosperity greater , and goods , opportunity best the for Breaking down and markets around services and
Celebrating the Millennium 
 the Millennium Celebrating
 Celebrating Millennium the
 Millennium Celebrating the
 the Celebrating Millennium
 Celebrating Millennium the
 Celebrating Millennium the
 Millennium the Celebrating
 the Celebrating Millennium
 the Millennium Celebrating
 the Celebrating Millennium
 Celebrating the Millennium
 the Millennium Celebrating
 the Millennium Celebrating
 Millennium the Celebrating
 the Celebrating Millennium
 the Millennium Celebrating
At the inception of this program, that was not allowed.  
Because men die earlier and women live longer, the money went mostly to women. 
It costs more money. 
I am not saying that is bad. 
I am just saying that all of a sudden it costs more money because women are either lucky or live better or cleaner lives than men, and they live longer.  
Senator Gigantès :
They survive us. 
It takes strength and intelligence.  
Senator Moore :
Meaning we are not intelligent?  
Senator Gigantès :
Not as much as the women are.  
Senator Tkachuk :
Then the benefits were extended. 
The provision went from having to live together for seven years to share in CPP benefits - in other words, when one died the other one would pick up the cash - down to one year. 
If you lived together for one year, the other person was considered your husband or your wife, and benefits again were extended to the surviving spouse - another increased cost.  
Yesterday, Senator Kirby alluded to the possibility that there may be other social changes in those arrangements. 
I know what that means. 
It is possible that governments may recognize gay marriages, and I think he wanted to let us know that there may be these kinds of changes taking place. 
That is fine, if the government wants to do that. 
 the Millennium
 Millennium the
 the Millennium
 Celebrating Millennium
For Canadians, the start of the new millennium represents an historic opportunity to celebrate our achievements as a nation and our hopes for the future. 
 our a of , celebrate . our to future hopes the opportunity millennium For for nation and as represents achievements historic Canadians the new the an start
 achievements historic start as for hopes the the millennium represents nation Canadians For opportunity our a of , . and to new the celebrate future an our
 , hopes of our . and represents to the new as an the opportunity for the our future millennium achievements historic start For Canadians celebrate a nation
 nation of to a millennium hopes . the opportunity future achievements historic celebrate , and an the the For start our Canadians represents new as our for
 our Canadians for , achievements of start new the celebrate millennium to an our the hopes . opportunity and a For as future the represents historic nation
 the a . our for as achievements to hopes new and celebrate the , historic Canadians nation an future of represents the For millennium opportunity start our
 future Canadians a represents of opportunity the start nation to millennium , achievements an the and for our historic as celebrate our For hopes the . new
 our represents future an the hopes celebrate Canadians as For and start historic nation our a the of the achievements . to for millennium opportunity , new
 celebrate new , represents for the For to millennium our a and an the . hopes achievements our of future start nation Canadians as the historic opportunity
 of represents an historic and a opportunity our our the hopes achievements start future the , . the to nation Canadians millennium new celebrate For for as
 future , to of . millennium opportunity the our the a celebrate For our achievements the historic as hopes start for nation an new Canadians represents and
 represents and the the . an our the , historic opportunity of for new celebrate to hopes achievements start millennium our future a For nation Canadians as
 Canadians future represents the For to opportunity hopes the . historic the a as an new achievements and start our our nation for of millennium , celebrate
 of an , the to as achievements millennium historic represents celebrate a new our our hopes . For and future Canadians opportunity start the nation the for
 historic celebrate opportunity For a hopes future millennium for the nation and our the . represents as Canadians the an achievements , of start our to new
 our as represents For start a millennium for the and new of achievements Canadians our . the , opportunity nation celebrate hopes historic an to future the
From the very beginning, the Government of Quebec assured this Parliament that there was an appropriate consensus in favour of the amendment in that province. 
However, the committee insisted on assessing and challenging these statements - so much so that the Quebec ministers responsible for education and for intergovernmental affairs eventually appeared before the committee, along with the official opposition critics on these matters. 
Clearly, what was - and still is - at issue is the legitimacy of the amendment.  
It was mentioned repeatedly that, as a result of the Supreme Court decisions, it has become obvious that the rights that are positively guaranteed under section 93 are not as broad as they were originally assumed to be. 
However, we do not believe that the amendment was justified because the denominational education rights guaranteed under section 93 were nothing more than empty shells. 
Had we been satisfied that the majority of Catholics or Protestants in Quebec were opposed to the amendment, it would not have mattered whether or not their rights carried much weight. 
I think that Senator Lavoie-Roux was quite right in saying that minorities often require special protection to be free to exercise their rights. 
But it is possible to limit or remove this special protection with the consent of a majority of this minority.  
It was then a matter of figuring out why a majority of members of these two groups were prepared to relinquish these privileges. 
It is important to point out that representatives of all the groups involved were consulted.  
Be that as it may, honourable senators, this amendment will not spell the end of denominational, be it Catholic or Protestant, education in Quebec. 
The Education Act of this province gives parents the right to choose between Catholic or Protestant denominational education for their children. 
It will be up to parents to decide whether publicly funded denominational education should be maintained indefinitely. 
The fact that the notwithstanding clause was used by the Government of Quebec to protect the existing education legislation seems to indicate, however, that the government reacted favourably to the wish expressed by some parents to maintain Protestant and Catholic denominational schools. 
We have every reason to believe that the place of religion in public education will be subject to a full, open and democratic debate and that the parents' choice will continue to prevail, as it has for so long outside Montreal and Quebec City.  
Throughout the debate that took place before the special joint committee and in this House, we considered the fact that subsection 23(1) of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms does not apply to Quebec and the issue of whether the amendment to section 93 would prejudice the educational rights of native Quebecers. 
Section 23 of the Charter and section 93 of the Constitution Act of 1867 concern educational rights and, instinctively, we might think they are closely linked. 
However, they are not constitutionally related and, in any case it seems entirely ill-advised to reduce consent for constitutional change to a mere transaction where one right serves as a bargaining chip for the improvement of another.  
Honourable senators, I strongly urge you to support this resolution. 
Although we noted there was a consensus to amend section 93, we felt the real issue was the quality of the education of children in Quebec, and on that point opinion was unanimous.  
 For Canadians , the start of the new millennium represents an historic opportunity to celebrate our achievements as a nation and hopes for the future .
 of , represents future opportunity the the our an For new . achievements historic for hopes a as millennium nation Canadians our celebrate start the and
 , the achievements represents historic hopes our Canadians future celebrate of millennium our the new and a as nation opportunity start . the for to For
 for the the our an hopes represents a our historic millennium to nation new and . as achievements , opportunity the of Canadians For future celebrate
It will be an unequalled opportunity to show ourselves and the world the richness of our diversity, the strength of Canadian values, and the great promise of our future in the 21st century.  
 an It . promise diversity will the of strength of unequalled 21st great opportunity Canadian and richness be show century the , in the the world our our , ourselves future to the of and values
 , future the the century be in It richness of will the of of Canadian our diversity values opportunity the great and show ourselves , the strength our promise unequalled an to world and 21st .
 world the of , the , be of the opportunity . to an and future values Canadian ourselves our show It diversity in will the of great our richness century unequalled the and strength promise 21st
 of Canadian great be our an the It diversity of ourselves the and promise to of century , future the values our the in world strength opportunity will unequalled 21st . the and , richness show
 opportunity world the of an and show the unequalled 21st be great of promise of century future to , strength . diversity will values ourselves the our It the , in Canadian our the richness and
 century to diversity ourselves , world show great promise our richness the . the of in the and and future the our unequalled 21st , It values be of an the will Canadian strength of opportunity
 and our , diversity our century of of be opportunity the , show richness an in values 21st to . the great future will world Canadian ourselves the the strength promise the of unequalled It and
 , and the an . of richness unequalled ourselves promise opportunity of the diversity strength , values the future our to the of world 21st great It and show century our Canadian in will the be
 the great century of to values ourselves strength , of the unequalled will in an diversity and opportunity promise future our of It world our the the show 21st the richness . Canadian and , be
 our opportunity richness , ourselves values unequalled promise century diversity of of show in the It of , 21st great . the an and will Canadian be world to and the strength future the our the
 show values and future diversity of our strength will great world the the century opportunity our richness to the and . an unequalled of of , be Canadian ourselves 21st the the in It , promise
 opportunity and . the show in future , will our 21st the ourselves , the and of the values an world It diversity unequalled of the richness promise century strength Canadian to be great of our
 world the in to unequalled strength of the future our the the an and the our richness great of ourselves of Canadian . and 21st will promise century , , It diversity show be opportunity values
 of the richness to great opportunity promise strength and , an of our in . future show century diversity values unequalled the our ourselves 21st the world the Canadian will , be of and It the
 ourselves world the great unequalled an richness diversity show be of of . , promise our 21st to in , of It the strength the and and future Canadian values the our will the opportunity century
 world the the will values of unequalled century , of Canadian of future the 21st an strength the ourselves , opportunity to richness show our great be . promise in diversity our It and and the
Meaning we are not intelligent?  
Senator Gigantès :
Not as much as the women are.  
Senator Tkachuk :
Then the benefits were extended. 
The provision went from having to live together for seven years to share in CPP benefits - in other words, when one died the other one would pick up the cash - down to one year. 
If you lived together for one year, the other person was considered your husband or your wife, and benefits again were extended to the surviving spouse - another increased cost.  
Yesterday, Senator Kirby alluded to the possibility that there may be other social changes in those arrangements. 
I know what that means. 
It is possible that governments may recognize gay marriages, and I think he wanted to let us know that there may be these kinds of changes taking place. 
That is fine, if the government wants to do that. 
Now you have two guys living together; one dies, the other one is picking up some cash. 
That costs more money. 
Well, two guys who live together for one year may not be gay. 
How would you know?  
Senator Gigantès :
You want surveillance cameras?  
Senator Tkachuk :
So there is an opportunity for fraud. 
This is not a pension program. 
 It will be an unequalled opportunity to show and the world the richness of our diversity , the strength of Canadian values , and the great promise of our future in the 21st century .
 great of the promise of our 21st the will richness be our . diversity ourselves of world , strength and unequalled opportunity Canadian the and to , future It century the an values show the
 ourselves , unequalled opportunity to our show promise strength and the be in the will an richness , future world of values and diversity century Canadian the 21st of our It great of the .
 our the in the strength diversity show opportunity the and richness of promise future world the our of an . will , to great and values 21st century be the , of Canadian It unequalled
The Government will help build a partnership among governments, communities and citizens to mark the new millennium. 
 , the help build . citizens and mark new to Government will partnership millennium The a communities governments among
 . governments will new communities millennium and the among a Government citizens The mark help , to partnership build
 a millennium partnership , new the and to mark communities among Government citizens The help will build . governments
 mark build Government to new and the among communities millennium The . , citizens will governments help a partnership
 millennium The to will . help a citizens , governments and build new mark among partnership Government communities the
 among partnership a to will mark millennium governments new Government help communities . and build the , citizens The
 build a citizens partnership governments . Government will and mark millennium among help communities new to The , the
 communities the citizens , and partnership a new mark help millennium among governments The will . to build Government
 communities . millennium help a to The build citizens mark new partnership among Government will , and governments the
 , the build The mark governments among partnership . and a help new will millennium communities Government to citizens
 help to millennium among partnership and will communities citizens build . , The a Government new the mark governments
 mark new communities build and among partnership help the millennium The a . governments , to citizens Government will
 help build and mark The among citizens governments millennium Government will a new to , partnership . the communities
 help to citizens Government will partnership and build millennium The new . , the communities governments among a mark
 the and a mark partnership among new governments communities The citizens build to , millennium help . Government will
 millennium a among communities new the partnership build The citizens help and governments , . Government mark to will
Senator Grafstein :
There are two parts to my honourable friend's question.  
I say, "Yes."  
Once we pass this amendment, it will be for the province of Quebec and those in the Province of Quebec to decide their educational architecture.  
I should like the province of Alberta to do things the way we do them in Ontario. 
Fat chance when it comes to education! 
Honourable senators, I think we have fulfilled our constitutional responsibilities if each senator is individually satisfied that a reasonable test of the majority of the minorities has been achieved. 
Under the evidence presented to us - not outside the room, but before us - that was clear. 
In that respect, I support the report and the resolution.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
It was moved by the Honourable Senator Pépin, seconded by the Honourable Senator Lucier, that this report be adopted.  
Is it your pleasure, honourable senators, to adopt the motion?  
Motion agreed to and report adopted, on division.  
Quebec 
Linguistic School Boards-Motion to Amend Section 93 of Constitution-Debate Adjourned 
Hon. Fernand Robichaud , for Senator Graham, rose pursuant to notice of Thursday, October 2, 1997: 
Whereas the Government of Quebec has indicated that it intends to establish French and English linguistic school boards in Quebec; 
and whereas the National Assembly of Quebec has passed a resolution authorizing an amendment to the Constitution of Canada; 
and whereas the National Assembly of Quebec has reaffirmed the established rights of the English-speaking community of Quebec, specifically the right, in accordance with the law of Quebec, of members of that community to have their children receive their instruction in English language educational facilities that are under the management and control of that community and are financed through public funds; 
and whereas section 23 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms guarantees to citizens throughout Canada rights to minority language instruction and minority language educational facilities under the management and control of linguistic minorities and provided out of public funds; 
 The Government will help build partnership among governments , communities and citizens to mark the new millennium .
 and communities the Government help will to millennium mark a citizens among partnership The new , governments .
 will to governments and a mark , citizens partnership help Government communities The millennium the new among .
 The governments among citizens Government communities and to new a the partnership build will mark , . millennium
Many Canadians have creative ideas and suggestions for millennium projects. 
 ideas for Canadians creative and projects suggestions Many . have millennium
 millennium . Many have projects creative and suggestions for Canadians ideas
 for creative and . Many have suggestions ideas projects Canadians millennium
 Many suggestions ideas projects creative and Canadians millennium have for .
 have for millennium projects and ideas Many suggestions . Canadians creative
 ideas creative millennium . projects suggestions for have Many and Canadians
 suggestions Many millennium ideas creative have . and for Canadians projects
 creative have millennium for projects and Canadians . Many suggestions ideas
 and for suggestions have creative ideas millennium projects Canadians . Many
 Canadians millennium for creative Many suggestions have ideas projects and .
 and for Canadians millennium have creative projects Many . suggestions ideas
 millennium for have Many ideas . Canadians creative projects suggestions and
 Canadians Many ideas for suggestions . projects and creative millennium have
 for projects Many have millennium ideas . creative and Canadians suggestions
 have Many millennium for creative . Canadians and ideas projects suggestions
 millennium Canadians for Many creative ideas have . suggestions projects and
Can you imagine a prime minister who said that he is a man of the people, a man who is determined to change the way government is done, now ramming through the most dramatic changes to our pension system without informing the Canadian public of just what the government is proposing and allowing input from them?  
Honourable senators, I refer to questions raised in this place over the last several months, questions that relate to the ever-increasing taxes that this government is imposing on the lives of all working Canadians. 
For example, on October 1, Senator Michael Meighen asked the following: 
My question relates to employment insurance premiums. 
Given that, according to best estimates, the account will be at a $16-billion surplus this fiscal year, could the Leader of the Government explain to members here today why his Minister of Finance refuses to consider any reductions of premiums...  
He went on further to state: 
Honourable senators, to bring C.D. Howe's quote up to date, "What's a billion?" 
To say that we should rejoice that the premium was not increased from $2.80 to $3.20 is a little like saying that the Leader of the Government should be happy that I am only going to whack him over the head three times instead of ten.  
It seems to me that employment insurance premiums should not be a primary method of fighting the deficit or the debt....  
Honourable senators, we are building this huge surplus and raising Canada Pension Plan premiums - in other words, it is a double tax on Canadians. 
You argue that the Canada Pension Plan is not a tax, but that is not how our kids see it. 
Our kids see it as a tax, because you are taxing their generation to pay for the retirement of our generation. 
It is a tax no matter what you say, and no matter how you say it.  
On October 23, I asked the following: 
Honourable senators, I rise to ask a follow-up question to the response of the Leader of the Government to Senator Meighen's question of October 1 on employment insurance premiums. 
The honourable leader stated that a cut in the EI premium would cost the government some $4.2 billion in lost revenues. 
I would point out to him that this amount may be overstated by 25 to 50 per cent, because it fails to take into consideration increased revenue through greater employment and investment that would be generated by a reduction in premiums.  
Be that as it may, the honourable leader will no doubt recall that in 1995, the Minister of Finance indicated that when the EI surplus reached $5 billion, we would reduce premiums to the break-even point because the surplus would then be sufficient to deal with a recession equivalent to the recession of 1990.  
Accordingly, would the Leader of the Government tell us for what purpose the government is accumulating a $7-billion surplus in the fund for this calendar year, a surplus which will total $13 billion by December 31, and $15 to $16 billion by the end of the fiscal year, namely March 31, 1998? Would the Leader of the Government clarify today whether the amount in excess of $5 billion is designed to deal with a future recession of a two- to three-year duration, with the unemployment rate in the range of 11 to 12 per cent, or is it simply a surtax on jobs through high EI premiums, with a view to using the accumulated surplus to reduce the deficit?  
My concern is that the youth do not believe that, when they reach their retirement age, they will see a nickel of the Canada Pension Plan. 
 Many Canadians have creative ideas and suggestions for millennium projects
 projects Many Canadians ideas have suggestions . and millennium creative
 and . suggestions millennium for have projects ideas Canadians Many
 for and projects . have Canadians Many suggestions creative millennium
There will also be an opportunity for parliamentarians from all parties to participate in developing ideas to mark the millennium.  
 There millennium developing to for parties mark in be to all from . ideas will opportunity parliamentarians the also participate an
 opportunity parties be for There the to in will also developing all mark parliamentarians . an participate millennium to from ideas
 millennium an ideas to mark participate . parliamentarians the to parties in be developing There opportunity from also will for all
 opportunity . There to also developing participate all from parliamentarians the to will be for mark parties in ideas an millennium
 opportunity developing for parties to to millennium . in from also mark all participate ideas be will parliamentarians an the There
 opportunity developing will participate parliamentarians an be There from ideas also all parties mark millennium for the in to . to
 an the ideas mark to all for millennium in parties will There from be also developing . opportunity parliamentarians to participate
 opportunity There . the also be parties millennium in all ideas an from mark will to parliamentarians to for participate developing
 to be opportunity millennium in will mark . ideas all for There also to parties participate from parliamentarians the developing an
 from millennium be for parliamentarians to the also opportunity parties will mark participate . There all ideas to developing an in
 the millennium from mark also developing There opportunity ideas for an participate all parliamentarians to to parties be will in .
 . an from opportunity developing for all mark be in participate parties to ideas the to parliamentarians also There millennium will
 ideas . be mark an from opportunity all participate parties the parliamentarians developing There in will millennium also for to to
 There in to all parties developing to the . ideas from millennium be will also an mark opportunity parliamentarians participate for
 opportunity developing an from parliamentarians also all parties to for mark participate to There will the . millennium be in ideas
 in parliamentarians to also for developing will There all from participate millennium an ideas parties the opportunity mark to . be
Section 7 of the Charter indicates that Mr. Boyle had the right to life, privacy and security of the person, and those rights were not to be taken from him except by and in accordance with the principles of fundamental justice.  
I think the justices of the Supreme Court of Canada should be sent a message reminding them that the victim also had rights under the Charter.  
In all fairness, honourable senators, I must say that three of the justices dissented with the majority decision. 
They felt the police action had no bearing or outcome on the decision. 
The chief justice came down the middle and quoted the decision made by former chief justice Brian Dickson, which I understand finds that, if the subject is not spelled out in the Constitution, it is implied as being there. 
However, there again, that is merely my interpretation.  
I emphasize again that Mr. Boyle had the right to his life. 
He had the right to have a vehicle and operate it, and he had the right to have money in his possession. 
All those were taken away from him, and all the Supreme Court of Canada could think of was that piece of paper called a "warrant" and to criticize the police for not having such a document.  
I wanted to suggest that perhaps criminals should apply for a warrant before they commit murder, but I do not want to pursue that because I am afraid that some Charter judge will give them a warrant or a licence to do so. 
Fifteen years ago, I would have been shocked at criticism of a decision rendered by the Supreme Court; but, today that is commonplace. 
When a major decision comes down from the Supreme Court, the media is there to interview people who wish to comment, mostly negatively, on the decision. 
As I stated, we would not have seen a headline like that 15 years ago.  
That is their function, and Parliament has referred it to them. 
However, the enactment of laws remains the function of Parliament. 
It is not the function of the Supreme Court of Canada or any other court to make laws.  
Honourable senators, I read in today's paper where the families of the Leslie Mahaffy and Kristen French, both of whom were killed by Paul Bernardo, are appealing to the judge to make a law prohibiting evidence of that type being heard by the public in court. 
The interesting point is that they are asking the judge to make the law; they are not asking Parliament. 
Parliament is the highest court in the land and that must always be so. 
It would be most unusual to have a lower court issue a directive to a higher court.  
 There will also be an opportunity parliamentarians from all parties to participate in developing ideas to mark the millennium .
 mark all from opportunity There will for . to to millennium parliamentarians in be the an parties ideas also developing
 parties will millennium an to also to parliamentarians ideas for participate from in mark . the developing opportunity all There
 opportunity participate to millennium in also will from developing parties the ideas to be . parliamentarians for all an There
Moving Forward into the 21st Century 
 21st Century into Moving the Forward
 Moving the Forward 21st into Century
 21st Moving the Century into Forward
 the Forward Century Moving into 21st
 Century the into Moving Forward 21st
 Moving 21st the Forward into Century
 the Moving into Century 21st Forward
 Forward Moving the Century 21st into
 the Century Moving into Forward 21st
 into Moving Forward 21st Century the
 Century Forward the into 21st Moving
 Forward 21st Century the Moving into
 Forward the into 21st Moving Century
 the into Moving 21st Century Forward
 the Forward Century Moving 21st into
 the 21st into Century Forward Moving
We talked to the Conservative government about that for many years and nothing was done.  
Senator Comeau :
We are not in power now. 
You should push your people.  
On motion of Senator Gigantès, debate adjourned.  
Canada Cooperatives Bill 
First Reading 
The Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C-5, respecting cooperatives.  
Bill read first time.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
When shall this bill be read the second time?  
On motion of Senator Carstairs, bill placed on Orders of the Day for second reading on Thursday next, December 11, 1997.  
Bill to Amend-Second Reading-Motions in Amendment-Debate Adjourned to Await Ruling of Speaker 
On the Order: 
Resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Moore, seconded by the Honourable Senator Ferretti Barth, for the second reading of Bill C-16, An Act to amend the Criminal Code and the interpretation Act (powers to arrest and enter dwellings), 
And on the motion in amendment of the Honourable Senator Cools, seconded by the Honourable Senator Sparrow, that the motion be amended by deleting all the words after "That" and substituting the following therefor: 
"Bill C-16, An Act to amend the Criminal Code and the Interpretation Act (powers to arrest and enter dwellings), be not now read a second time because 
( a ) the Senate is opposed to the principle of a bill which has been placed before Parliament as a result of the judgment of the Supreme Court of Canada of May 22, 1997, and of the Court's Orders of June 27 and November 19, 1997; 
( b ) the Senate finds it repugnant that the Supreme Court is infringing on the sovereign rights of Parliament to enact legislation and is failing to respect the constitutional comity between the courts and Parliament; and 
( c ) the Court is in effect coercing Parliament by threatening chaotic consequences respecting law enforcement and arrests if Parliament does not pass this bill."  
 Moving Forward into 21st Century
 the Forward into 21st Moving
 Moving Century into Forward the
 Forward Century the Moving into
Almost 100 years ago, Sir Wilfrid Laurier said, "The 20th century shall be the century of Canada and of Canadian development." 
 said and The of the Canadian 100 shall Wilfrid Laurier Almost Canada development years Sir ago century of , be " , 20th century ."
 Laurier of ago century ." development century 100 shall of years The , be said " , Almost Canada and the Canadian 20th Wilfrid Sir
 ." Almost Wilfrid Canadian of the century development , 100 The 20th be " ago said of years , Canada and century Laurier shall Sir
 development and 100 Almost 20th Canada , , " century shall Canadian be ." Laurier century The years of the said Sir Wilfrid ago of
 " said the be Laurier century , shall 100 , Canadian Almost Canada 20th ago of years and ." development century Sir of The Wilfrid
 be Sir " said , the of ." ago 20th century Almost The years Canada Canadian shall and , Wilfrid century of development Laurier 100
 Almost century be Sir ago development Laurier of , of " The and the shall 100 years Canada Canadian said century 20th ." Wilfrid ,
 20th Canada , ." Canadian be said Almost " of century and Laurier ago , 100 years shall Wilfrid of Sir development the The century
 Sir ." the of Canadian The development Canada ago shall century 100 , , be said Wilfrid " century Laurier of and 20th years Almost
 Canadian said development years " century ." 20th Sir Laurier of ago , and the , 100 The Wilfrid Canada be shall Almost of century
 Canada shall Wilfrid 20th and , development Almost Sir of , century years Laurier century 100 of ago ." The " Canadian said be the
 be Sir century Canada , , Almost ago Wilfrid the development 100 The of Canadian 20th Laurier century and shall years of said " ."
 the ago Almost , " , shall Canadian development of and said of Sir century 100 century The Canada be Laurier Wilfrid ." years 20th
 years 20th Wilfrid The the Canada 100 century Canadian , said Sir shall ." Laurier be of development " and , century of ago Almost
 ." century 100 said of years Sir Laurier 20th ago and be Canada shall , Almost the Wilfrid Canadian , development " The century of
 of shall , Almost " , Laurier ." ago century Wilfrid Sir The the Canada of years and Canadian be century 100 said 20th development
There is no question whatsoever in my mind, based on the evidence that I heard.  
Now we come to the more difficult question confronting members of the committee - to determine if there was a "majority" of the so-called "minorities" affected or given these denominational privileges.  
Even here, we had difficulty in definition. 
Notwithstanding that, we still treated that majority as if it were a minority.  
I will not repeat Senator Stewart's questions yesterday about section 93 and its limited scope, but I commend all students of the Constitution to examine section 93 and see how even the subsections of section 93, in so far as that section pertains to the province of Quebec, are much narrower in its scope than is clearly understood or debated in this Senate chamber. 
I will not go into that aspect of this debate. 
It would take half an hour, but I would be pleased to do so privately with any senator who is interested.  
The evidence we heard was extensive, definitive and clear. 
Let me quickly review the committee's evidence that brought it to conclude that there was a strong majority of the so-called minorities affected.  
We had a unanimous resolution in the National Assembly of Quebec, both parties, with two abstentions. 
The efforts made by the Quebec ministers seem to assure that a strong consensus had been obtained.  
We heard direct evidence from 68 groups composed of over 100 individual witnesses. 
Notwithstanding the short time-frames allotted in our terms of reference and as referenced by Senator Lynch-Staunton, the committee clearly heard every viewpoint that people wished to express.  
I hear Senator Wood. 
I will deal with her concerns in a moment.  
While some individual groups did not give evidence, as pointed out by Senator Wood, I concluded that, having examined the materials from those groups, that their viewpoint was indeed expressed by others during the course of those hearings. 
I believe no viewpoint was excluded from our deliberations.  
The time frames in the hearings in no way diminished the committee's ability to obtain or weigh the evidence. 
The committee made a thorough investigation of that evidence. 
No point of view went unexamined, save for one raised by the Reform Party at the last minute, and I will deal with that later.  
 Almost 100 years ago , Sir Wilfrid Laurier said , " The 20th century shall be the century Canada and of Canadian development ."
 and , said century Canada 20th 100 of years the ." Laurier Almost The Canadian Sir century shall ago be development of , Wilfrid
 Sir ." development Canadian the Canada Wilfrid century ago and 20th , " 100 , Almost be The century shall Laurier of of years
 The be 20th said " Laurier , , Wilfrid Almost the and century Canadian development years century of 100 ." of Sir shall ago
He was right. 
 right He . was
 right . He was
 He was right .
 He . was right
 was He . right
 was He right .
 was He . right
 . He was right
 . was right He
 He was right .
 was right . He
 . right He was
 was He right .
 He right was .
 was . He right
 was He right .
My concern is that the youth do not believe that, when they reach their retirement age, they will see a nickel of the Canada Pension Plan. 
My kids do not, and I understand that Senator Tkachuk's kids do not. 
If our children are thinking that, then I am certain many more people out there are thinking the same thing. 
Does the government not owe it to these youth of today to say that, in five or ten years, yes, the fund will be on good ground? 
I am sure it is trying, but somehow the message is not getting through. 
As a result, when the bill comes to us for consideration, all hell breaks loose.  
I do not think Canadians are aware of what is taking place in this place today, or what will happen as a result of passage of this bill. 
It will have a multiplier effect. 
Not only are we dealing with the Canada Pension Plan, but we are also dealing with the modernization of the other parts of the retirement structure, the Guaranteed Income Supplement and the Old Age Security. 
When you put all of that together, over time, Canadians, and particularly our youth, will say that enough is enough. 
You cannot have high EI premiums or high taxation through high EI premiums to pay your deficit down; then jack up your rates on the Canada Pension Plan; and then modify the OAS and GIS such that people receive reduced payouts, because you are hitting the same generation. 
You have bought off the seniors, and you are hitting the kids. 
They will not forget that.  
On October 30, Senator Tkachuk asked the following: 
Why is the government trying to fix the CPP by hitting hardest those least able to afford it?...  
Could the Leader of the Government in the Senate prevail upon his colleague the Minister of Finance to have his officials produce information showing the impact of the freeze in the earnings exemption for different ranges of income?  
For example, could data be prepared showing how much the freeze will benefit the government from those earning income below the poverty line relative to their family income, and how much it will save those with incomes above the poverty line relative to their total income?  
In other words, it is and will be perceived as another tax.  
On November 5, Senator Oliver said: 
They are increasing it by one month per year to give people time to adjust to the new reality of that retirement age. 
 He was .
 right He .
 right was He
 He right was
Today, we have the opportunity for success in the 21st century that is far beyond what Laurier could have ever imagined.  
 . that Today , could the is have for the in ever opportunity success Laurier beyond we have what far imagined century 21st
 , opportunity could ever century have 21st . is the in the Laurier have that beyond what Today imagined we far success for
 could in is have for century opportunity imagined far success , beyond ever . the that 21st have the Today what we Laurier
 , the century opportunity Laurier have . that 21st imagined success far the for Today could in ever have we what is beyond
 is success beyond the the Today have imagined 21st have for that century ever what we , opportunity . far in Laurier could
 Today in , . that 21st imagined Laurier far have opportunity ever is beyond what have success for the could the century we
 have that success could the opportunity Today ever century in for beyond we . what Laurier is imagined far have the 21st ,
 , ever success what the is 21st could we Laurier in for imagined have the opportunity . beyond that have century far Today
 that success Today for what opportunity we . Laurier century the is beyond 21st ever in , far could imagined have the have
 21st beyond is century far Laurier what the in have that could for ever opportunity we imagined the success . have Today ,
 21st beyond for what have Today we , that century in have success the Laurier could is the far ever opportunity . imagined
 the far 21st imagined in success century opportunity the Today ever could have we , beyond Laurier . that what is have for
 the is century for have far that we , . could beyond have opportunity 21st Today ever Laurier in imagined success what the
 we beyond Laurier . Today could that is far the for the in have have what century 21st success ever , imagined opportunity
 is we in ever , for beyond have that opportunity the the 21st Today success Laurier what far have could imagined century .
 the Today in that beyond could what the . far 21st opportunity century imagined have is for we success ever have Laurier ,
It was not Mr. Caouette's money, it was real bucks. 
The second director was also an experienced investment fund manager, but the government changed in Quebec, and we ended up with people who were more dynamic and who wanted to direct the economy. 
That is when it was decided that the people running the Caisse were not dynamic enough and had to be replaced. 
That was done. 
That is how a deputy minister of finance came to be the president of the Caisse de dépôt et placement du Québec at a time when Finance Minister Parizeau was a very influential member of the Lévesque cabinet. 
This led Quebec industry leaders and other stakeholders to raise all sorts of questions about the policy and management of the Caisse under his direction.  
You know the arbitrary risks inherent in choosing the companies in which the board can invest. 
Of course, there are provisions to limit the ratio, but everyone knows that the percentage of shares required today to control a company is relatively small. 
Can you imagine what kind of arm-twisting this will lead to? 
To collectivize an operation is to politicize it. 
That is what we are doing here, notwithstanding the precaution taken to maintain the board members' independence from the government. 
Even if we are told that they will come from outside the government and operate at arm's length from the government, we must be realistic.  
I would now like to address an important aspect of the bill, namely the impact of the plan on the two pillars of income security mentioned by Senator Kirby. 
The 25 or 30 per cent amounting to $22 billion a year goes to old age pensions. 
Every year, we save $80 billion, or 10 per cent of the gross national product, which goes to income security, including $22 billion from old age pensions, $23 billion from the Canada pension fund and $30 billion or $35 billion from private pension plans. 
Savings coming from private pension plans should remain stable in the future or else get smaller depending on the decisions we make. 
Contributions will increase by 70 per cent within five to seven years. 
I think the amounts will remain stable, but they could also drop, if this increase is not compensated by an equivalent decrease in income tax, for instance.  
As for RRSPs, they are likely to diminish if employment insurance contributions and taxes are not lowered.  
In my opinion, we will likely see a reduction in private savings, along with an increase in public savings. 
 Today , we have the opportunity for success in the century that is far beyond what Laurier could have ever imagined .
 21st that have beyond we could success the imagined in opportunity far Laurier . is century ever what , the have for
 the . is ever Laurier for success the that Today century have opportunity what 21st have we in imagined far could ,
 century 21st the Laurier ever , far have could is beyond that success opportunity Today the we have what in for imagined
To achieve this success we have more work to do - work that no one can do alone. 
 . do can we no To alone more this work achieve do have - to one success work that
 alone work more achieve to success one this no . do have work do - that To can we
 that work - To do success do can one . alone this work to have achieve more we no
 do have we do work this more to success achieve that can - . To alone no one work
 achieve To one work work this success do . we to can - do no that have more alone
 success no that we to . this work work To one have do - alone achieve do more can
 To one to . have this more - we that success do no do work work can alone achieve
 success do one work . we to that no do have can achieve more work alone this - To
 we do alone - have . do that no more this work success to one achieve work To can
 work we can have one do no success To achieve that alone . work this to more - do
 success - alone more work we have that do can do work one this achieve to no . To
 work one can more do alone have this work no . we success To to that do achieve -
 do work to this do - one . more have we can that no To work success alone achieve
 work no more we that one work success alone do To this achieve to have do can - .
 do more do we can have this to alone success work that no . - To one work achieve
 achieve . more alone do can no this one have success that work work we to - do To
Senator Tkachuk :
Because the Liberals would not agree. 
I will defend my government, and my honourable friend will defend his.  
I will not delve too far into the OAS because there are other speakers who wish to deal with this issue over the next two weeks. 
Perhaps we, as senators, will be able to discuss this matter well into the new year, which I hope we do.  
Senator Gigantès :
You are reading from the wrong script.  
Senator Taylor :
It is obvious that my honourable friend does not have any notes.  
Senator Tkachuk :
I think I am getting to honourable senators opposite.  
I was told by the Honourable Senator Kirby that members opposite would only have one speaker on this issue. 
I have a feeling that we may hear from a few more senators after I and other senators point out some of the weaknesses in Bill C-2.  
Honourable senators, I would reiterate that this is not a pension program: this is a payroll tax! 
In the past, it harboured cheap loans for provinces, and it will harbour a $100-billion fund that will grow to a $1-trillion fund. 
Honourable senators, we will not need to pay the price. 
We will be long gone before the young people who starting out now, and who expect a pension plan when they grow old, will reap the benefits of what we sow today.  
Honourable senators on this side and honourable senators on the other side, I do not know why you would want to rush this bill. 
What is in it for you? 
What is in it for the Minister of Finance? 
 To achieve this success we have more work to do - that no one can do alone .
 do have work no do To - we work achieve success this one alone can more to .
 success work can one we . that this do - To no achieve do have more work alone
 one that alone To - we to have work achieve more this . do work success no do
Each and every one of us must assume personal responsibility for our community and our country. 
 must us for . every country and our personal Each our of community assume one responsibility and
 every responsibility for us our Each personal . and must assume country of community our one and
 personal every of assume responsibility country community and us must . for our one and our Each
 of one and our Each responsibility country every assume community personal and for . our us must
 and Each our for personal responsibility one country our us of . community every and must assume
 Each responsibility for community our every our country assume of us personal one and must . and
 our country assume for us of personal every must and Each and . our one community responsibility
 and assume our personal one must responsibility community our us . of country Each and for every
 one for Each responsibility every and our and our us assume must . personal community of country
 every personal our community of Each . us country for and and our responsibility assume one must
 Each one community us our country our and responsibility for of must personal and assume every .
 country one personal our and of for assume must every us responsibility Each our and . community
 assume personal country and for us . Each and every our of community one responsibility our must
 country community us must and Each assume our of our for personal responsibility one . every and
 must our of Each for our and assume country every us and responsibility community . one personal
 us country for Each assume one responsibility and every of . personal our must community our and
During the consultations on the draft CPP legislation, including House of Commons Finance Committee hearings, several pension fund experts recommended against publishing quarterly statements. 
They argued that the routine publication of quarterly results could tend to draw attention away from the longer-term investment objectives of the Board. 
Other large pension funds like the Ontario Municipal Employees Retirement System and the Ontario Teachers Pension Plan do not publish their quarterly results for these reasons. 
For a pension fund, long-term investment performance is paramount.  
Changes to Canada Pension Plan-Investment Board Not Subject to Access to Information Act-Government Position 
(Response to question raised by Donald H. Oliver on November 19, 1997) 
Applying the Access to Information Act to the CPP Investment Board would be inappropriate.  
The Board's mandate is to invest CPP funds at arm's length from governments in the best interest of plan members. 
As an investment institution, much of its day-to-day activities will be commercially sensitive and would be exempt under ATI in any event.  
While ATI does not apply to the CPP Investment Board, by legislation and regulations the Board's operations will be very transparent and it will be subject to close public scrutiny.  
For example, the Board will be required to: 
- make public its investment policies, code of conduct, corporate governance practices, proxy voting guidelines, and by-laws 
- disclose the compensation of the five most highly compensated officers of the Board 
- prepare quarterly financial statements that will be sent to federal and provincial Finance Ministers, and an annual report that will be tabled in Parliament 
- hold regular public meetings in each participating province to allow for public discussion and input 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
Commemoration of Fiftieth Anniversary-Plans of Government 
(Response to question raised by Hon. Noël A. Kinsella on October 23, 1997) 
The 50th Anniversary provides Canadians an opportunity to reflect on the importance of human rights in the life of the country, as they are a fundamental unifying value and an important part of our legacy to future generations.  
The objectives of the commemoration are to promote respect for human rights and responsibilities; mark Canada's national and international progress in implementing human rights standards; develop innovative and responsive approaches to emerging human rights issues; and, to link values highly esteemed by Canadians - values such as respect for the rule of law, dignity of the person, fairness, equitable treatment and democratic participation - to a broader government agenda related to social cohesion and social justice.  
 Each and every one us must assume personal responsibility for our community and our country .
 must our one community assume personal . for and Each country every our responsibility us of
 community every . our us must responsibility of and our and Each personal for assume country
 our us . one responsibility Each personal for and community our every must country and of
Our greatest responsibility is to build a new spirit of sharing and mutual respect for a new century.  
 . to spirit is build greatest a sharing and new of century respect new a Our responsibility mutual for
 spirit Our and for a sharing to new a is new respect mutual century responsibility greatest . build of
 new to is build . mutual for a a and Our responsibility century sharing new spirit respect greatest of
 Our for is and responsibility a of new respect new spirit a build mutual greatest sharing to century .
 respect mutual century . is Our a for greatest new new build sharing responsibility a to of spirit and
 and spirit new is build for respect century sharing of new responsibility . greatest to a Our a mutual
 . new for greatest sharing responsibility century a respect mutual Our build of spirit new and to a is
 mutual century respect responsibility build is for sharing to new Our spirit and new a greatest . a of
 for responsibility respect of new to is greatest . sharing mutual build and century new spirit a Our a
 greatest mutual Our . new of build century a new sharing and responsibility for respect is to a spirit
 respect greatest century spirit for of sharing build Our new and a is to . a responsibility new mutual
 and spirit new of for responsibility a Our sharing to greatest century new respect a mutual build . is
 mutual a is respect new . Our sharing new a spirit of century greatest responsibility to build and for
 new new a a and of to sharing for spirit greatest . responsibility century is mutual Our respect build
 new respect greatest . century Our a spirit new a responsibility mutual for build and sharing of is to
 spirit to Our century and greatest of . a a respect is new for build responsibility mutual new sharing
Can the minister report on what the government has spent and what will be spent in the future for communications concerning the Canada Pension Plan, including polling, focus groups, communications, advice and strategy and advertising?  
Other than the simple response that there was a 1-800 number that people could call, I received no response. 
That is what the government determines is a sufficient communications plan for Canadians to understand what the heck is going on. 
That is a travesty. 
That, to me, is not responsible government whatsoever. 
Can you imagine a prime minister who said that he is a man of the people, a man who is determined to change the way government is done, now ramming through the most dramatic changes to our pension system without informing the Canadian public of just what the government is proposing and allowing input from them?  
Honourable senators, I refer to questions raised in this place over the last several months, questions that relate to the ever-increasing taxes that this government is imposing on the lives of all working Canadians. 
For example, on October 1, Senator Michael Meighen asked the following: 
My question relates to employment insurance premiums. 
Given that, according to best estimates, the account will be at a $16-billion surplus this fiscal year, could the Leader of the Government explain to members here today why his Minister of Finance refuses to consider any reductions of premiums...  
He went on further to state: 
Honourable senators, to bring C.D. Howe's quote up to date, "What's a billion?" 
To say that we should rejoice that the premium was not increased from $2.80 to $3.20 is a little like saying that the Leader of the Government should be happy that I am only going to whack him over the head three times instead of ten.  
It seems to me that employment insurance premiums should not be a primary method of fighting the deficit or the debt....  
Honourable senators, we are building this huge surplus and raising Canada Pension Plan premiums - in other words, it is a double tax on Canadians. 
You argue that the Canada Pension Plan is not a tax, but that is not how our kids see it. 
Our kids see it as a tax, because you are taxing their generation to pay for the retirement of our generation. 
It is a tax no matter what you say, and no matter how you say it.  
On October 23, I asked the following: 
Honourable senators, I rise to ask a follow-up question to the response of the Leader of the Government to Senator Meighen's question of October 1 on employment insurance premiums. 
 Our greatest responsibility is to build a new spirit of sharing mutual respect for a new century .
 responsibility a a Our new sharing century of is build mutual spirit respect and greatest for to new
 and is respect build new century a greatest new for sharing . mutual to of responsibility a spirit
 a Our greatest and century mutual a build of respect sharing is . to new responsibility for new
By working together, by respecting the value of our diversity, we will secure our future and build a stronger country. 
 of respecting by our working the build value , , country our together diversity secure we a stronger future By . will and
 future diversity respecting we together by a country secure build By and , the , working stronger will our our . of value
 our . and working respecting country value we of our together will a build , by secure , stronger future diversity By the
 will value diversity together a respecting secure the our of stronger we working by our and , country future build . , By
 our by build By diversity value together . stronger and our , country a , future secure of we working respecting will the
 will working a and diversity future country our . stronger By , the build by together of , value we respecting secure our
 a country our value By , our the we future . secure diversity respecting of , will and by together working build stronger
 will we respecting , , our future value our a by the diversity of build working country . together and stronger secure By
 build a working of country our and . will secure , we together our diversity by the future respecting , stronger By value
 of build and , by value stronger will working we our a future the together our By , secure . respecting diversity country
 stronger country and , a future we our diversity value working . secure will respecting , our the of together build by By
 . diversity stronger , our country the respecting value together working secure By , of build a will our future by and we
 By respecting by a we build the future will , value working secure our stronger our . diversity , and of together country
 and respecting build of working By future value will our diversity by our , we stronger a , country together . secure the
 value , diversity and the country of by respecting our future will stronger secure . a together our build By , we working
 value will build working diversity . a and our together the country we , By future by , respecting of stronger secure our
Yes, the resolution is imperfect. 
We would like to have done it "our way," as Frank Sinatra used to say, but we must deal with the Province of Quebec in this case. 
We had to bend imperfect tools to see whether they fit our minimum requirements. 
In my view, they did not fit our minimum requirements; they fit our reasonable requirements for constitutional amendment.  
Senator Wood :
Is it not true in the letter from the bishops of Quebec - the letter the honourable senator read - that they were in favour of repealing section 93? 
They questioned linguistic rights and suggested that denominational guarantees established by 107 be maintained. 
There was a caveat there that my honourable friend forgot to read.  
Senator Grafstein :
I find myself in great difficulty defending Roman Catholic theology let alone letters from Roman Catholic archbishops. 
I will leave it to each senator to come to his or her own conclusion on the testimony and on the letters, which are appended to the report.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Honourable senators, Senator Grafstein is quite right in stating that reform is needed. 
Actually, reform is well under way in Quebec. 
The new system, it seems, will be in place for the next school year. 
New linguistic boards will be set up. 
There will be some difficulties, but, overall, it is proceeding quite well.  
What linkage is there between the new school system in Quebec and the request to exempt Quebec from certain obligations of section 93? 
I do not see any.  
Senator Grafstein :
 By working together , by the value of our diversity , we will secure our future and build a stronger country .
 By working our future , , . value build respecting of and a the our will country secure stronger we together by
 a will , of by working . value , By country and build respecting future our secure our together diversity we the
 By together and respecting build will by of we the , , diversity country secure future our a value working our .
We will ensure that our future economic opportunities are sound, our children well prepared, our lives healthy, and our communities strong.  
 , sound our opportunities , will We well our children that , our are . lives economic strong communities ensure future and prepared our healthy
 well our , our strong that our healthy are lives will We . future ensure , sound and , children our economic prepared communities opportunities
 future . prepared children strong our our our We economic , healthy ensure sound , , opportunities communities that well lives and our are will
 and our strong . economic sound We prepared are future healthy our , communities well , , ensure our will children opportunities that lives our
 will , our , We our our well healthy sound lives are our . that strong and opportunities ensure , communities economic future prepared children
 our We , , will prepared and , our children that are well lives future strong sound ensure . opportunities our our economic healthy communities
 that . our lives opportunities children , are prepared healthy , communities strong and our , sound will our our future economic well ensure We
 . our economic ensure children will are well and We strong opportunities , , , that healthy lives future prepared our communities our our sound
 well prepared our ensure strong our communities will , children healthy our are opportunities . sound , , economic our future that lives We and
 are that economic our communities future ensure children sound strong prepared , , well will opportunities . healthy our lives and our , our We
 that our strong well lives our future opportunities our communities , and . will sound are prepared economic our , We children ensure , healthy
 healthy opportunities . , well children lives prepared our economic are that , , We our communities our and will our future strong ensure sound
 well opportunities economic lives our healthy strong are our , that , sound communities our ensure our children prepared , We and will future .
 , strong lives our , well our economic will children our future opportunities , are ensure our communities healthy sound We and that prepared .
 , . prepared healthy communities , our sound will our strong economic well that future ensure our children our , opportunities We and are lives
 strong , will , . our our economic well communities children our healthy that ensure , sound We prepared and opportunities lives are our future
Motion agreed to.  
The Senate 
Conduct of Business-Notice of Inquiry 
Hon. William M. Kelly :
Honourable senators, I give notice: 
That on Thursday next, December 11, 1997, I will call the attention of the Senate to the way in which the Senate conducts its business.  
QUESTION PERIOD 
Federal-Provincial Relations 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Province of Quebec-Request for Particulars 
Hon. Fernand Roberge :
Honourable senators, my question follows the announcement made yesterday regarding the government's decision to set at $12.5 billion the cash floor for transfer payments made under the Canada health and social transfer (CHST). 
The government would have us believe that this amount represents an increase in health care payments. 
However, the figures indicate otherwise.  
The following year, in 1999-2000, they will only be $3.748 billion. 
Yet, the government claimed yesterday that it was implementing a stable transfer system. 
In fact, cash payments paid to Quebec for health and education will be reduced by over $300 million over a five-year period. 
Honourable senators, I remind you that these cuts are in addition to this year's reduction of $700 million compared to last year. 
Could the minister make inquiries and inform the Senate of the reasons why, in spite of a cash floor set at $12.5 billion, Quebec's share will diminish by $307 million over the next five years?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
The federal government cut its own spending earlier, more drastically and in greater measure than transfers to the provinces. 
 We will ensure that our future economic opportunities sound , our children well prepared , our lives healthy , and our communities strong .
 future well our . , our and prepared economic strong our will , lives ensure communities healthy that sound children our , opportunities are
 sound healthy our well opportunities , children prepared will that lives are ensure , , our our strong economic . future our and We
 will opportunities economic , sound children , communities ensure our are and that our our well , future We strong prepared lives . healthy
Each generation has the opportunity to choose the society it wants to leave for its children. 
 leave choose has opportunity children wants the to . society its the for Each generation it to
 opportunity it . its the choose Each for wants has society to the children to leave generation
 the wants children to Each leave generation for its it opportunity to . has society the choose
 leave to has children the to the for its Each choose opportunity it wants society generation .
 children it leave society . the its to to the Each choose has wants opportunity for generation
 choose wants to opportunity it to generation the . the for has leave society its Each children
 Each wants children for opportunity leave . generation has the to choose to the it society its
 children wants the its . the for to to Each choose society opportunity it generation leave has
 wants leave generation its the to has opportunity the . it for Each choose children to society
 its children . leave has the Each wants choose to for society the opportunity to it generation
 the wants for the generation it its has society children Each choose to leave . to opportunity
 children generation it . Each leave choose the its society for to the to opportunity wants has
 the for to society wants has it children leave Each its choose generation opportunity the to .
 the the Each generation to has it to its choose . opportunity society leave children wants for
 its it has society to the generation the . to choose children for wants Each leave opportunity
 to to its children has the choose it generation wants the Each . opportunity for leave society
The government would have us believe that this amount represents an increase in health care payments. 
However, the figures indicate otherwise.  
The following year, in 1999-2000, they will only be $3.748 billion. 
Yet, the government claimed yesterday that it was implementing a stable transfer system. 
In fact, cash payments paid to Quebec for health and education will be reduced by over $300 million over a five-year period. 
Honourable senators, I remind you that these cuts are in addition to this year's reduction of $700 million compared to last year. 
Could the minister make inquiries and inform the Senate of the reasons why, in spite of a cash floor set at $12.5 billion, Quebec's share will diminish by $307 million over the next five years?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
The federal government cut its own spending earlier, more drastically and in greater measure than transfers to the provinces. 
The government has made it clear that it will use increased fiscal flexibility to make strategic investments in priority areas, and action was taken early and directly on that commitment based on favourable fiscal results that emerged this past spring.  
With respect to individual provinces, I do not have those numbers. 
However, I would be happy to provide them for my honourable friend.  
Senator Roberge :
Could the minister find out at the same time why, in the same time period, Ontario's share of the cash transfers will increase to $173 million?  
Senator Graham :
Yes. 
While I am doing that, I should like to remind the honourable senator that even before the federal government balances the books, it is putting more money into transfers to the provinces. 
In fact, the government is raising the cash floor from $11 billion to $12.5 billion, the single largest reinvestment made by the federal government. 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Provinces-Effect on Atlantic Provinces 
Hon. Mabel M. DeWare :
 Each generation has the to choose the society it wants to leave for its children .
 it choose Each opportunity has to . the wants to leave the its generation children society
 the to choose Each generation children society has wants its leave to for it opportunity the
 it wants children society opportunity to generation choose for to the Each the has . its
The greatest legacy we can leave to our children in the new millennium is a vibrant living legacy that will make Canada a better place: a stronger country with a brighter future and greater opportunities for its young people. 
 make people that future stronger living : a leave will a legacy a the young better The opportunities and . place its to in for children new millennium can a greatest our with country legacy is brighter greater we Canada vibrant
 . future place is a can leave better Canada that children a legacy legacy a with vibrant : greater and young for to our stronger opportunities a the The its in new country brighter will make living greatest millennium people we
 stronger vibrant can opportunities the children we our a a greater new make with millennium Canada greatest will a . for better and The is a legacy young living that future : legacy to country its leave in people brighter place
 make will new its greater The we is . children in millennium people that future brighter opportunities with greatest can legacy the and vibrant a legacy country stronger Canada our : a a place to a leave better living young for
 the for our and we legacy country in people vibrant better brighter . its is : a stronger legacy place make children a greater a that will millennium greatest leave young can new opportunities with Canada a future to The living
 children will . : greatest a Canada can a legacy in better people country with millennium stronger its greater the make our a future opportunities that and young a living legacy for we The to leave place vibrant new is brighter
 living in the make a country . for with a brighter a legacy better new our stronger : place legacy greater leave will its is we children people millennium Canada that young The can and a to future opportunities vibrant greatest
 legacy Canada stronger greatest living our and brighter to for a a country The legacy make millennium young with children people a greater a future the : its will vibrant opportunities can leave better new . we that in place is
 country legacy and in for The stronger that a a our greatest its people can future is to living . greater a opportunities with brighter vibrant a we place make legacy leave new the millennium children better will young Canada :
 a make will brighter we . opportunities and to that greatest people young : country in future a a legacy the greater can Canada a is better place millennium The leave our living its stronger for vibrant children with legacy new
 a people millennium future and its greater stronger with brighter legacy will a living a Canada . vibrant can better : is in opportunities a leave children to legacy place young for that The new make greatest the country we our
 children millennium its legacy future leave a legacy a living vibrant opportunities will in greatest country with . brighter a make new Canada the our : can is stronger a people The for better greater we young to that and place
 children for opportunities that future is vibrant living better with millennium people greater country a to make stronger and legacy the can its place we will The a : in brighter young . a leave a our new Canada legacy greatest
 our a brighter legacy leave children living a legacy people with country in the that will greatest better can future make millennium new a to we Canada and stronger opportunities young its vibrant : for greater a is . place The
 better a the that future opportunities vibrant to will a stronger our brighter we for people legacy children in and place a millennium its with young . leave : can is greatest new make The living Canada legacy greater a country
 make future The a living leave opportunities for that will millennium our children better is brighter legacy in the people greater to a : can country we with place and vibrant legacy a Canada a new young stronger . greatest its
Senator Graham :
The matter of the helicopters is under active consideration by the government.  
Cabinet met last Thursday. 
Senator Forrestall :
If that is the last cabinet meeting before the Christmas break, I gather we will not see any decision until sometime in the new year.  
Senator Graham :
If that is a question, I would hope my honourable friend is wrong, and that I am correct in saying that it is to be hoped that there will be a decision before the end of this year.  
Senator Forrestall :
Cabinet will meet again, then. 
I am pleased to hear that.  
Search and Rescue Helicopter Replacement Program-State of Sea King Helicopter Fleet-Government Position 
Hon. J. Michael Forrestall :
Where are the other six? 
Are they on ships at sea? 
We have 30 in the inventory.  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, the answer is yes, there are 30 helicopters in the inventory. 
As I indicated yesterday, 24 were cleared, and six remain to be inspected. 
They will be inspected by December 18.  
Of the 24 that were inspected, only two were found to be in need of repair. 
 The legacy we can leave to our children in the new millennium is a vibrant living legacy that will make Canada a better place : a stronger country with a brighter future and greater opportunities for its young people .
 legacy vibrant and : young . for we new greater stronger a millennium that children greatest brighter country our a legacy its opportunities with leave a make in future better is people will place Canada the to The a can
 in will opportunities : legacy legacy to greater is future a its the a The and . leave young stronger Canada a new people place better for greatest a that country vibrant children with our brighter millennium can living make
 : young . better legacy place millennium a a people its opportunities our is in will country we greatest children leave legacy and make The a that a Canada the to new living greater future stronger for can with vibrant
By working together, we will build that future.  
 working together we By future will . , that build
 build that . together future , we will working By
 future , we By . together build working that will
 , build working By we that will . future together
 we , together future . will By build that working
 together that By we future will working build . ,
 that we build together . working , By will future
 that . By working together build we will , future
 that build By will future , we together working .
 build working will that together , future . we By
 By that working we build future will together . ,
 will working future we build By , together . that
 By future together that , . build working will we
 future that By we build . working will together ,
 we . that , future will By together build working
 we will build together , By that . working future
Not to my knowledge. 
It is my understanding that those helicopters are at sea on exercises. 
As to precisely where they are, on whatever ocean, I cannot positively say. 
It might be a military secret, as a matter of fact.  
Federal-Provincial Relations 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Atlantic Provinces Equal to Increase in Social Transfers-Government Position 
Hon. Brenda M. Robertson :
Honourable senators, I have a supplementary that goes back to questions raised by the Honourable Senator DeWare. 
I will come back to this again tomorrow and the next day.  
I should like to know from the Leader of the Government in the Senate whether the cuts we discussed yesterday in the social transfer payments for Atlantic Canada represent the increases in the social transfers that were announced twice previously by this government? 
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
No, not that I am aware, but it is an interesting question. 
I will bring forth an answer.  
Delayed Answers to Oral Questions 
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, I have a response to a question raised in the Senate on November 25, 1997, by the Honourable Senator Oliver regarding changes to the Canada Pension Plan and the Investment Board; a response to a question raised in the Senate on November 19, 1997, by the Honourable Senator Oliver regarding the Investment Board not being subject to Access to Information; a response to a question raised in the Senate on October 23, 1997, by the Honourable Senator Kinsella regarding commemoration of the 50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights; a response to a question raised in the Senate on November 20, 1997, by the Honourable Senator Forrestall regarding the lack of helicopters for a number of navy frigates; and a response to a question raised in the Senate on November 20, 1997, by the Honourable Senator Spivak regarding the demolition of government laboratories and the possibility of a restoration of funding.  
Human Resources Development 
Changes to Canada Pension Plan-Accountability and Transparency of Investment Board-Undertaking to Publish Quarterly Financial Statements-Government Position 
(Response to question raised by Hon. Donald H. Oliver on November 25, 1997) 
Bill C-2 requires that the Board prepare unaudited quarterly statements and provide them to the federal and provincial Ministers of Finance. 
 By working together , we will build that future
 . we , By future that build working will
 , will we build By . working together future
 we will that working By . build future together
Members of the House of Commons: 
 Members of of : Commons House the
 of of House Commons Members the :
 Members of : of Commons House the
 of House of : Members the Commons
 Members the : Commons of House of
 of House : the Commons of Members
 of the Members Commons House : of
 of the Commons of : House Members
 Commons the Members of of House :
 the Members : of Commons House of
 House Members the : of of Commons
 the of House : Members of Commons
 Commons House Members of the : of
 of the : Members House of Commons
 Members of House the of : Commons
 House Commons : Members of of the
Honourable senators, I have listened to your arguments attentively. 
You have argued your case like good lawyers. 
There is no doubt about that. 
What you said basically is that it is up to Quebec to address its education problem and decide whether there will be guarantees of denominational education in the schools. 
You say it is a provincial problem. 
In my speech, I have said that there is no guarantee whatsoever that that is what will happen. 
But the right to dissentience that was guaranteed under section 93 of the Constitution will no longer be protected. 
The opinion of the Parti Québécois on this is known, and that is why it is a bit awkward.  
Senator Grafstein :
There are two parts to my honourable friend's question.  
I say, "Yes."  
Once we pass this amendment, it will be for the province of Quebec and those in the Province of Quebec to decide their educational architecture.  
I should like the province of Alberta to do things the way we do them in Ontario. 
Fat chance when it comes to education! 
Honourable senators, I think we have fulfilled our constitutional responsibilities if each senator is individually satisfied that a reasonable test of the majority of the minorities has been achieved. 
Under the evidence presented to us - not outside the room, but before us - that was clear. 
In that respect, I support the report and the resolution.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
It was moved by the Honourable Senator Pépin, seconded by the Honourable Senator Lucier, that this report be adopted.  
Is it your pleasure, honourable senators, to adopt the motion?  
 Members the House of Commons :
 of Members the : House of
 Members Commons the of of House
 the House of Members : of
You will be asked to appropriate the funds required to carry out the services and expenditures authorized by Parliament.  
 will be to and out carry Parliament expenditures by appropriate authorized to You the the funds required . services asked
 authorized by required be . to appropriate carry You out Parliament services funds and asked the the to will expenditures
 by to appropriate . be and the required services You Parliament expenditures to will asked funds carry out the authorized
 required and carry to by . the authorized services be appropriate the out expenditures Parliament will to You funds asked
 . authorized by services to be to required out will Parliament the the funds You appropriate asked and carry expenditures
 services by the carry . funds out to asked will and expenditures the required to appropriate You Parliament authorized be
 be . will appropriate by services out the expenditures funds required authorized You to Parliament to asked the carry and
 will expenditures carry authorized appropriate and . the You by required to funds to be asked out the services Parliament
 be out Parliament and the to the expenditures to services will funds You by authorized carry appropriate . asked required
 carry will expenditures authorized be appropriate funds You the services out required Parliament to and . to asked by the
 appropriate . required be and carry Parliament authorized will services to out to funds asked the by expenditures You the
 required . the funds services and expenditures will to the to authorized carry You Parliament out be asked by appropriate
 appropriate will the Parliament carry the authorized by services You funds . and asked required to to expenditures out be
 Parliament carry the and be by to will expenditures appropriate authorized to out asked services the You . funds required
 asked the out authorized Parliament funds to You by . required expenditures and to services the appropriate carry will be
 required authorized carry Parliament be expenditures will to by the You appropriate the services funds and to asked . out
However, in addition to the evidence, we did refer to opinion polls that seemed to suggest a strong support for reform along these lines.  
Yes, the resolution is imperfect. 
We would like to have done it "our way," as Frank Sinatra used to say, but we must deal with the Province of Quebec in this case. 
We had to bend imperfect tools to see whether they fit our minimum requirements. 
In my view, they did not fit our minimum requirements; they fit our reasonable requirements for constitutional amendment.  
Senator Wood :
Is it not true in the letter from the bishops of Quebec - the letter the honourable senator read - that they were in favour of repealing section 93? 
They questioned linguistic rights and suggested that denominational guarantees established by 107 be maintained. 
There was a caveat there that my honourable friend forgot to read.  
Senator Grafstein :
I find myself in great difficulty defending Roman Catholic theology let alone letters from Roman Catholic archbishops. 
I will leave it to each senator to come to his or her own conclusion on the testimony and on the letters, which are appended to the report.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Honourable senators, Senator Grafstein is quite right in stating that reform is needed. 
Actually, reform is well under way in Quebec. 
The new system, it seems, will be in place for the next school year. 
New linguistic boards will be set up. 
There will be some difficulties, but, overall, it is proceeding quite well.  
What linkage is there between the new school system in Quebec and the request to exempt Quebec from certain obligations of section 93? 
I do not see any.  
 You will be asked to appropriate the funds required to carry out the services expenditures authorized by Parliament .
 Parliament required will the by . to out asked expenditures and carry authorized the to You appropriate funds services
 services to required be the . out funds authorized the You expenditures Parliament to asked will by carry appropriate
 the asked You services out by expenditures to . appropriate funds the be Parliament required and carry will authorized
Honourable Members of the Senate, Members of the House of Commons: 
 of Members Commons : Senate of House the of Honourable Members , the
 , of of Commons Senate the the House Members : Honourable Members of
 the , : Senate of Members Honourable Members the of House of Commons
 of : Senate Commons Honourable of , House of Members Members the the
 the Members House of : , Senate the Commons of Members of Honourable
 of of the the Members Honourable , Members Commons House : Senate of
 the of : the House , Senate Members Honourable of Commons Members of
 Members : the of of of Senate , Commons Honourable Members the House
 House of Senate Members : Commons the of of , the Members Honourable
 of Senate Members Honourable House Commons , : Members the the of of
 of the House the Members Honourable Members of of : , Senate Commons
 of Honourable Senate Members Members Commons of the of : House , the
 , of Members of Commons : Honourable the House of Members Senate the
 of Members the : the Members Senate House of of Honourable , Commons
 : the of , House Senate of Commons Members the of Members Honourable
 of the Senate Commons Members House : Honourable of , the of Members
If the deputy leader could guarantee to us that, on Wednesdays from now on - and we will strive to be cooperative - we will sit no later than 3:30 p.m., unless there is a proven urgency, then I think Senator Stewart's motion is in order. 
However, we need that assurance first.  
Senator Carstairs :
Let me assure the Leader and Deputy Leader of the Opposition that we will do everything on our part to ensure that sessions end on time. 
We did sit yesterday, which was a Monday. 
I can assure senators we will be sitting next Monday in order to fulfil the business of the chamber before the Christmas break.  
Senator Kinsella :
On that basis, I do not think leave is necessary.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is leave granted?  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
He just felt it was not necessary.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Leave is granted.  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is it your pleasure, honourable senators, to adopt the motion?  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
 Honourable of the Senate , Members of the House of Commons :
 of Members Honourable Senate : House of Members the the of Commons
 of Members Members Honourable : House Senate of of the the Commons
 : the Members Members of the of of , Senate Commons House
May Divine Providence guide you in your deliberations.  
 . Divine May Providence you your guide deliberations in
 in guide Divine Providence May you your . deliberations
 you Divine . guide May deliberations your in Providence
 . Divine Providence May deliberations in your you guide
 in guide deliberations you your Divine . May Providence
 Providence May deliberations . your guide you in Divine
 you Divine May deliberations guide your in Providence .
 . in guide you your May Providence Divine deliberations
 Providence May in . Divine your deliberations guide you
 your . Providence Divine May you in guide deliberations
 May . guide Providence Divine in deliberations you your
 . guide Divine in your you May Providence deliberations
 in deliberations guide you Providence . May your Divine
 you guide your deliberations in . Divine Providence May
 your guide Divine you in May . Providence deliberations
 you deliberations Divine guide . May your Providence in
We inconvenience them if we are not able to hear from them.  
I must congratulate senators on this side who have refrained, for the most part, from making Senators' Statements on Wednesdays, unless it was something quite urgent, as was Senator Kenny's statement today. 
They have tried to make their speeches on either Tuesdays or Thursdays. 
Senators on the other side have attempted to do the same thing. 
With that level of cooperation, perhaps at some time in the future we can invoke a more formal process whereby there will be some guarantee to committee chairs.  
Barring that formal process, Senator Stewart has witnesses to hear from tomorrow, and I should like him to have permission to hear those witnesses tomorrow.  
Hon. John Lynch-Staunton (Leader of the Opposition) :
That worked for a while. 
Now we have forgotten Mondays, but we have continued on with the practice of having early sittings on Wednesdays. 
As a result, Wednesday has become a normal working session, going on until five or six o'clock. 
The whole purpose of starting the session at 1:30 p.m. has been defeated.  
I do not think it is correct, unless there is an urgency, for committees to sit at the same time as the chamber. 
This is not for appearances' sake, but because the work done here can often be as important in the debates as what goes on in committees. 
At various stages of our work - the introduction of bills, second reading, committee referral, then third reading - we are often doing several at the same time. 
Sometimes even two, three or four committees are sitting when we are sitting. 
That is an improper practice.  
If the deputy leader could guarantee to us that, on Wednesdays from now on - and we will strive to be cooperative - we will sit no later than 3:30 p.m., unless there is a proven urgency, then I think Senator Stewart's motion is in order. 
However, we need that assurance first.  
Senator Carstairs :
Let me assure the Leader and Deputy Leader of the Opposition that we will do everything on our part to ensure that sessions end on time. 
 May Divine Providence guide in your deliberations .
 guide in you Providence your . Divine deliberations
 deliberations in you . guide Providence Divine your
 Divine in May deliberations guide you Providence your
The House of Commons withdrew.  
 The Commons House of withdrew .
 Commons House . The of withdrew
 The Commons of withdrew House .
 withdrew Commons The of . House
 House The of . Commons withdrew
 The . withdrew Commons House of
 withdrew House of The Commons .
 The Commons of withdrew . House
 of The Commons House . withdrew
 House of withdrew . Commons The
 Commons of withdrew House . The
 The . House withdrew Commons of
 House The withdrew of . Commons
 Commons . The of House withdrew
 The withdrew of Commons . House
 The House withdrew . Commons of
We are the supreme court of the land when it comes to legislation. 
We must view the evidence before committees with care. 
I urge all senators, before they vote, to carefully review the full transcript of the evidence.  
Let me say at the outset that I was very sceptical, particularly after having read the Quebec resolution which was adopted unanimously in the Quebec Assembly, save for two abstentions, and which was quickly passed by the Quebec assembly requesting the federal government amend section 93 of the Constitution by deleting the subsections in so far as their application pertains to Quebec. 
These sections were incorporated in the British North American Act, 1867. 
The Quebec resolution in its fourth recital gave the Quebec assembly's opinion that the proposed amendment to section 93 requested in no way constituted recognition by the Quebec assembly of the Constitution Act, 1982, which was adopted without its consent.  
Honourable senators, noticing as you must that I am and remain a staunch supporter of the Constitution Act, 1982, this caused me great personal grief and concern.  
The first hurdle I had to overcome was whether or not the wording of the Quebec resolution on its face was so invidious, so egregious and so inconsistent that the recital made it inoperable and, in the process, would defeat its own request to amend the 1867 provisions by the mechanisms of the 1982 Constitution.  
I asked myself how the Province of Quebec could be asking for an amendment to the Constitution contained in the 1867 British North America Act, which was now part of the 1982 Constitution, while recognizing that the only methodology available to Parliament would be via the Constitution Act, 1982.  
Section 43 of the 1982 Constitution contains bilateral amendment processes between the federal government and provinces where their interests are solely engaged. 
Clearly, the only highway, the only path the Government of Quebec or the assembly of Quebec could take to achieve its objective was via the 1982 Constitution.  
Honourable senators, I then examined the federal resolution, which is the one we are being asked to consider. 
The federal resolution differs substantially from the Quebec resolutions. 
They are both appended to the report for your consideration.  
The federal resolution made reference not only to the 1982 Constitution, but to section 23 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedom incorporated in the Constitution Act, 1982.  
I concluded, after listening carefully to legal advice proffered before the committee, that the operative clause of any constitutional resolution was the wording of the amending clause itself. 
While recitals are of interest, while they are opinionated, while they are descriptive, they are not binding.  
Again, it was clear to me that the only way that the federal government could accede to the Quebec assembly's request was by utilizing the 1982 Constitution. 
The Government of Quebec knew this. 
We in Parliament knew this. 
 The House of withdrew .
 The House of Commons .
 . House Commons of The
 House Commons . withdrew The
His Excellency the Governor General was pleased to retire.  
 the Excellency to General retire was His Governor . pleased
 to pleased General His . retire Excellency the was Governor
 retire . His General Excellency the was to pleased Governor
 His to . Governor was Excellency General retire pleased the
 His retire . to the pleased was Governor Excellency General
 pleased Governor to the His was retire Excellency . General
 His . was Governor Excellency the General to pleased retire
 was Excellency . the pleased Governor General to retire His
 His was pleased . to General the Governor retire Excellency
 the was Governor . retire His General to Excellency pleased
 His the pleased to retire was Excellency Governor . General
 Governor General Excellency the pleased retire was to His .
 the to pleased retire Excellency . was General Governor His
 was . to General Governor Excellency the retire His pleased
 to General the . was His Excellency pleased Governor retire
 was Excellency . to pleased General retire the Governor His
The Senate 
Conduct of Business-Notice of Inquiry 
Hon. William M. Kelly :
Honourable senators, I give notice: 
That on Thursday next, December 11, 1997, I will call the attention of the Senate to the way in which the Senate conducts its business.  
QUESTION PERIOD 
Federal-Provincial Relations 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Province of Quebec-Request for Particulars 
Hon. Fernand Roberge :
Honourable senators, my question follows the announcement made yesterday regarding the government's decision to set at $12.5 billion the cash floor for transfer payments made under the Canada health and social transfer (CHST). 
The government would have us believe that this amount represents an increase in health care payments. 
However, the figures indicate otherwise.  
The following year, in 1999-2000, they will only be $3.748 billion. 
Yet, the government claimed yesterday that it was implementing a stable transfer system. 
In fact, cash payments paid to Quebec for health and education will be reduced by over $300 million over a five-year period. 
Honourable senators, I remind you that these cuts are in addition to this year's reduction of $700 million compared to last year. 
Could the minister make inquiries and inform the Senate of the reasons why, in spite of a cash floor set at $12.5 billion, Quebec's share will diminish by $307 million over the next five years?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
The federal government cut its own spending earlier, more drastically and in greater measure than transfers to the provinces. 
The government has made it clear that it will use increased fiscal flexibility to make strategic investments in priority areas, and action was taken early and directly on that commitment based on favourable fiscal results that emerged this past spring.  
 Excellency the Governor General was pleased to retire .
 Governor to retire His pleased . General was Excellency
 pleased His . Governor to General retire Excellency the
 pleased Governor the was . His retire General to
The sitting of the Senate was resumed.  
 Senate of . the was sitting resumed The
 . Senate resumed The sitting was of the
 resumed of was the Senate The . sitting
 the Senate sitting The . was of resumed
 sitting Senate . was the of The resumed
 the of Senate The resumed . was sitting
 resumed . sitting of the Senate was The
 The Senate of . was sitting resumed the
 of . Senate the resumed was sitting The
 the Senate resumed . sitting was The of
 was sitting Senate The . of the resumed
 sitting was The . the resumed of Senate
 of sitting . resumed the The Senate was
 the resumed was . sitting The of Senate
 of Senate resumed . sitting The the was
 sitting . the was Senate of The resumed
Paul Martin promised in the old Red Book that the government would cancel the helicopter purchase and use the money to pay for more social programs. 
Now, $900 million later, we have no helicopters that fly safely. 
He penned the Red Book to renegotiate the free trade agreement. 
He took all the kudos after the 1993 election.  
Now he says: "Rush Bill C-2. 
Trust me." 
The minister says that he needs the bill now to satisfy an agreement with the provinces. 
I have heard of no agreement. 
No one here has heard of an agreement. 
If someone on the other side knows of an agreement, please tell me.  
We have not heard one province asking us to abandon our parliamentary responsibilities and rush this bill through by January 1 on the threat that they will cancel their agreement. 
The Minister of Finance is rushing so that he can get another $400 million in taxes for the 1997 tax year. 
The brunt of this bill is being borne by middle- and lower-income workers.  
Merry Christmas Canada. 
Let us give Canadians a Christmas present by defeating this bill. 
Let us kill the bill.  
We are well aware of the Liberal record. 
We resent the fact that this bill will not be given full Senate scrutiny. 
We also know what will happen when things go wrong with this bill, as they will. 
I outlined the government's record on making promises. 
 The sitting of the Senate was resumed
 was the resumed The of Senate .
 resumed Senate The was of the .
 of The the Senate resumed . sitting
Railways Bill 
 Bill Railways
 Railways Bill
 Bill Railways
 Bill Railways
 Bill Railways
 Railways Bill
 Railways Bill
 Bill Railways
 Bill Railways
 Railways Bill
 Railways Bill
 Bill Railways
 Bill Railways
 Railways Bill
 Railways Bill
 Railways Bill
...given current commitments to action.  
Could the Leader of the Government tell us if the relevant ministers are aware of this study, whether there have been any responses, or what the reaction has been to this prestigious firm's study?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
It provides very important data. 
I am not sure the government would necessarily agree with the findings of the study but, certainly, those findings will be taken into consideration.  
Senator Spivak :
I am glad to hear that.  
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Concept of Differing Targets-Government Position 
Hon. Mira Spivak :
In the current discussions in Kyoto, the idea of tailoring reductions targets to individual countries' economic and social profiles rather than having a one-size-fits-all commitment has gained some currency, particularly in view of the most recent American proposal. 
Where does the Canadian delegation stand with respect to this concept?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government):
Honourable senators, the media is reporting, of course, on a possible deal on targets and time-tables which could see Canada accepting a reduction of 5 per cent from 1990 levels bythe year 2010. 
At this point, these reports are speculative, but negotiations are ongoing.  
National Unity 
Recent Remarks of Prime Minister-Possible Conditions of Secession of Quebec-Government Position 
Hon. Pierre Claude Nolin :
Honourable senators, I would like to return to the matter of the Prime Minister's statement last weekend on Quebec's secession. 
He said in fact last week in Quebec City that he would be prepared to negotiate Quebec's separation, if certain conditions were met.  
I would first like to know what conditions the Prime Minister was referring to?  
 Bill
 Railways
 Railways
 Bill
First Reading 
 Reading First
 Reading First
 Reading First
 Reading First
 First Reading
 Reading First
 Reading First
 Reading First
 First Reading
 First Reading
 First Reading
 First Reading
 First Reading
 First Reading
 Reading First
 First Reading
In my speech, I have said that there is no guarantee whatsoever that that is what will happen. 
But the right to dissentience that was guaranteed under section 93 of the Constitution will no longer be protected. 
The opinion of the Parti Québécois on this is known, and that is why it is a bit awkward.  
Senator Grafstein :
There are two parts to my honourable friend's question.  
I say, "Yes."  
Once we pass this amendment, it will be for the province of Quebec and those in the Province of Quebec to decide their educational architecture.  
I should like the province of Alberta to do things the way we do them in Ontario. 
Fat chance when it comes to education! 
Honourable senators, I think we have fulfilled our constitutional responsibilities if each senator is individually satisfied that a reasonable test of the majority of the minorities has been achieved. 
Under the evidence presented to us - not outside the room, but before us - that was clear. 
In that respect, I support the report and the resolution.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
It was moved by the Honourable Senator Pépin, seconded by the Honourable Senator Lucier, that this report be adopted.  
Is it your pleasure, honourable senators, to adopt the motion?  
Motion agreed to and report adopted, on division.  
Quebec 
Linguistic School Boards-Motion to Amend Section 93 of Constitution-Debate Adjourned 
Hon. Fernand Robichaud , for Senator Graham, rose pursuant to notice of Thursday, October 2, 1997: 
Whereas the Government of Quebec has indicated that it intends to establish French and English linguistic school boards in Quebec; 
 Reading
 Reading
 Reading
 First
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Acting Deputy Leader of the Government) presented Bill S-1, relating to railways.  
 Hon Bill Leader - relating , Deputy Carstairs . Sharon the of Government to ( presented 1 railways S . ) Acting
 Government S , Bill . - . of relating Carstairs ( ) Hon to railways Acting Leader Sharon presented 1 the Deputy
 1 Bill the of presented relating - . Deputy ) Acting Hon , to S Government ( . Sharon railways Leader Carstairs
 railways S Hon Leader ( Government of to , presented the Sharon Bill - ) Deputy relating 1 Acting . . Carstairs
 Government Acting ( Deputy 1 Leader railways Bill ) Hon to Carstairs presented . relating S Sharon of , - . the
 Bill railways . Acting ) ( - to . Deputy Government Sharon , Carstairs Hon presented 1 relating the of S Leader
 presented relating Carstairs Leader ) railways Deputy Government Bill . , Acting S Hon 1 of - ( . Sharon to the
 Hon Deputy relating presented Sharon . ) of railways 1 Leader Bill to Acting . S Government , the - ( Carstairs
 to ( S presented - railways . Acting Bill Carstairs Sharon Hon the 1 Leader Deputy ) of relating , . Government
 S Hon 1 Bill Acting . , presented ) Carstairs - . of Sharon Deputy railways the to ( Leader relating Government
 the S relating Government . - of Acting ) to Sharon Leader , 1 Bill Carstairs Hon ( railways . presented Deputy
 ) Leader to 1 Government . , railways relating S Acting the Hon . presented - Deputy ( Sharon of Bill Carstairs
 . 1 . the presented Acting to ) railways of Deputy Government relating S Bill - ( Carstairs Hon Leader Sharon ,
 presented Government Deputy of relating railways Hon Sharon to - Carstairs . ( the Leader , S 1 ) Acting . Bill
 ( . Sharon presented to S Deputy Government , Leader ) 1 railways Acting the Bill Hon Carstairs - relating . of
 Government relating of . ( presented Acting 1 Carstairs to ) Bill Hon . Leader the Deputy railways Sharon S - ,
If they meet the standards of a constitutional change, I, for one, will support them, notwithstanding the fact that I mistrust their motivation and mistrust what they say. 
However, on matter of dealing with the rule of law, I am bound by the rule of law.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
My question has nothing to do with that answer. 
It was renewed in 1982 and given protection from the Charter. 
Quebec has finally adopted a linguistic school system that looks very promising and can be implemented without section 93 being amended, unlike Newfoundland, which needs an amendment to Term 17 to be able to implement a non-denominational system. 
The two resolutions are completely different in content and intent.  
Again, my question relates to the fact that the new linguistic school board process is well under way. 
There will be elections to the boards in June. 
What impact does the modification of section 93 or the non-modification of section 93 have on what is already under way?  
Senator Grafstein :
Again, honourable senators, there are two solitudes here. 
I believe that education, in pith and substance, is a provincial matter.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
That is not the question.  
Senator Grafstein :
That is what the Constitution says.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
I do not disagree.  
Senator Grafstein :
 . Sharon Carstairs ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Government ) presented Bill S - 1 , relating to railways .
 Bill 1 relating S . . Carstairs Acting - to Leader presented ) the Hon ( , of Sharon Government railways
 of Government presented 1 S , the railways - ) ( Deputy . Leader Sharon . Acting Bill Carstairs relating Hon
 1 Government ( , Sharon - Carstairs presented of relating railways Hon Leader ) Deputy Acting to . the S .
Bill read first time.  
 Bill read first . time
 first read Bill . time
 Bill read . first time
 Bill read first . time
 . read first time Bill
 first Bill . read time
 read . first time Bill
 first time . read Bill
 first . time Bill read
 time first . read Bill
 . Bill first time read
 first read time Bill .
 time first Bill . read
 time first read . Bill
 first read . time Bill
 Bill read . first time
I assume that if they choose to proceed, they can. 
However, why should we in the Senate allow any province to proceed in a way that we consider unlawful? 
If there is an amendment to the Constitution, each senator in his or her heart and mind, after reviewing the testimony, must come to a conclusion. 
He or she can either vote for, against or abstain from the vote on the resolution.  
They want to be under the law, as does the Province of Newfoundland. 
They want to be under the Constitution. 
If they meet the standards of a constitutional change, I, for one, will support them, notwithstanding the fact that I mistrust their motivation and mistrust what they say. 
However, on matter of dealing with the rule of law, I am bound by the rule of law.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
My question has nothing to do with that answer. 
It was renewed in 1982 and given protection from the Charter. 
Quebec has finally adopted a linguistic school system that looks very promising and can be implemented without section 93 being amended, unlike Newfoundland, which needs an amendment to Term 17 to be able to implement a non-denominational system. 
The two resolutions are completely different in content and intent.  
Again, my question relates to the fact that the new linguistic school board process is well under way. 
There will be elections to the boards in June. 
What impact does the modification of section 93 or the non-modification of section 93 have on what is already under way?  
Senator Grafstein :
Again, honourable senators, there are two solitudes here. 
I believe that education, in pith and substance, is a provincial matter.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
 Bill read time .
 time Bill first .
 Bill time read first
 read first . Bill
Speech from the Throne 
 from Speech the Throne
 Speech from the Throne
 from Throne the Speech
 Throne the Speech from
 the from Throne Speech
 Speech Throne from the
 from Speech Throne the
 Throne Speech the from
 Speech Throne from the
 from the Speech Throne
 Throne the from Speech
 from Throne the Speech
 Throne the from Speech
 from Speech Throne the
 Speech Throne from the
 from the Throne Speech
We know its record on responsibility. 
I can just see it. 
When this bill is in shambles, Paul Martin will be 95. 
Jean Chrétien will be 95 or 96 or 102.  
Senator Taylor :
They will still be in power.  
Senator Tkachuk :
He will not take responsibilities. 
The Grits will never take responsibility for their actions, as they did not when they cancelled the Somalia inquiry, and when they made false accusations against a former prime minister. 
I don't know who, but I'm not responsible."  
There was not an iota of evidence to prove that what they were saying was correct. 
They did not take any responsibility after cancelling the EH-101 contract. 
They are still talking about it in cabinet. 
Nor did they take any responsibility after their failed strategy in job creation. 
Nor did they take responsibility after almost losing the country in the Quebec referendum. 
"Trust us," they say. 
One thing we can count on is if this government says it is good for Canada, it is not good for Canadians.  
At the time of the 1966 social contract with Canadians, the Liberals were in power. 
They entered into a social contract with their citizens. 
It was they who did it. 
 Speech the Throne
 Speech the from
 from Speech the
 the Speech from
Consideration Next Sitting 
 Sitting Consideration Next
 Consideration Next Sitting
 Sitting Consideration Next
 Sitting Consideration Next
 Next Consideration Sitting
 Consideration Sitting Next
 Next Sitting Consideration
 Next Consideration Sitting
 Consideration Sitting Next
 Consideration Next Sitting
 Next Sitting Consideration
 Consideration Sitting Next
 Consideration Next Sitting
 Sitting Consideration Next
 Next Sitting Consideration
 Next Consideration Sitting
Ontario's Conservative government is also demanding large cuts to UI premiums, Mr. Eves said in an interview...  
Alberta Treasurer Stockwell Day also indicated last week that he'll be pushing Mr. Martin for tax cuts.  
I predict today that, although this government has managed to get away with things for which our government would have been slaughtered, I think this bill, coupled with what is coming down the track and the changes in OAS and GIS, coupled with the arrogance of the stance taken at Kyoto, this is the kind of arrogance that, inevitably, will be the downfall of this government. 
I predict that that is about to happen.  
Hon. Thelma J. Chalifoux :
Honourable senators, I have a number of concerns regarding the statements of Senator Stratton. 
I would like to know what his position is on the working poor and on part-time workers. 
In this country, there are more part-time workers and more working poor than there are people who identify as middle class. 
What is the honourable senator's opinion on that?  
In this country, we have a totally isolated segment of society which is called "the mid-Canada corridor." 
Even in terms of communications, there is very little. 
What would the honourable senator do in the area of communication for those in isolated settlements regarding private pension plans? 
There are no words in Cree or michif for "private pension plan."  
I was a member of the working poor in 1965 and 1966 when this plan was put into force. 
I did not agree with the Canada Pension Plan. 
However, I will guarantee honourable senators right now that I totally agree with deductions being made, because now at least I have a pension.  
What will happen if this plan goes through is that the people in this country who really need it will get it. 
They have to travel 240 kilometres to the closest bank. 
Many do not speak English. 
What would you do in this case for these people who have nothing?  
 Consideration Next
 Sitting Next
 Next Consideration
 Consideration Next
The Hon. the Speaker :
 Hon : . the The Speaker
 The : the Hon . Speaker
 Hon the The Speaker . :
 Speaker . : the The Hon
 : Speaker The the Hon .
 : Hon the . Speaker The
 The the Hon Speaker : .
 the The . : Hon Speaker
 : Speaker Hon . the The
 . Speaker the : The Hon
 The : Hon . Speaker the
 Speaker The . the : Hon
 . Speaker : The the Hon
 the Speaker . The : Hon
 the Speaker The : . Hon
 Hon the : . Speaker The
Honourable senators, this is precisely where I wanted clarification. 
Are you recommending that the fund be divided into four $25-billion portions and that so many firms administer each $25-billion portion in its entirety? 
Or are you recommending that one firm be responsible for one sector, such as the real estate sector and another firm be responsible for another sector?  
Senator Bolduc :
Honourable senators, in my opinion, it could be by sector, but my preference would be for the total to be broken down into four portions covering a variety of investments. 
Otherwise, if you have a block of $25 or $30 billion in real estate, you know what that means. 
Senator Meighen :
You mentioned decentralizing the decision-making process, did you not? 
Do you see any advantage to having decision-making centres such as the firm handling the $25-billion segment being located in different parts of the country?  
Senator Bolduc :
In Quebec, when the problem came up in connection with the pension plan in 1966, we insisted on having our own plan. 
I am not saying that this is how it should be across Canada; that is not my point. 
What I am saying is that, in Quebec, at the time, Jean Lesage had made it very clear that the fund was designed to provide social security. 
That is why we fought so hard for the Caisse de dépôt et placement at the time: to have this flexibility.  
I am not saying this practice should be generalized and extended to Ontario or any other province; it may cause problems I had not thought of so far. 
There is no doubt that it could be more difficult for some provinces. 
I do not exclude however the idea that provincial politicians could bring pressure to bear on this organization so that, when investments are made, people from each region benefit. 
To what extent will ethics and conflict of interest rules be overlooked? 
My experience tells me and I can tell you that it is going to be complicated.  
Hon. Terry Stratton :
 The Hon . Speaker :
 the The : Speaker .
 . The the Speaker Hon
 : Hon . the Speaker
Honourable senators, I have the honour to inform you that His Excellency the Governor General has caused to be placed in my hands a copy of his Speech delivered this day from the Throne to the two Houses of Parliament. 
 delivered have placed two Speech , Excellency of to His from the this be a has to the senators caused Governor Throne Houses to you General my in honour Parliament . the day of copy the I his hands inform that Honourable
 you Governor Throne the placed senators Speech a the copy in of of Honourable to that has to my caused his General Parliament inform honour I delivered this hands , two . the to His the Houses Excellency be have from day
 to the inform day , to Throne my Governor I that General placed senators in the his delivered you the honour to have be Speech has Parliament this Honourable His caused the of Excellency a Houses . hands two of copy from
 to Honourable the that of delivered his a from to , hands to in honour Houses has my General Parliament have Throne His the senators Governor I of . Excellency this two you placed the day caused be Speech copy inform the
 inform placed Honourable His the , a to have of to from that Parliament Governor senators the in be Speech . Throne hands Excellency has the day of delivered copy caused honour you to this General Houses two my the I his
 . inform senators Speech copy in you a has this two of the delivered the be that Governor honour I day caused Honourable my placed Houses the , Throne the General his of Parliament have to hands to Excellency His to from
 Excellency , caused to Throne have that copy placed the Parliament his honour Honourable has day the delivered Houses of General Governor hands in His be inform to Speech you two senators the the I of from my a . this to
 caused Speech . this hands Honourable copy delivered I His to in the honour you of Governor that Houses senators Throne have the the day my has his placed Excellency to , the to General of from Parliament a two be inform
 this you to have his the caused His from hands I delivered to two to that Throne inform the Parliament a Speech of the senators the day . Honourable Governor General , Houses in has Excellency placed honour copy be of my
 of delivered his His Parliament that the the the Throne be Speech , you in to two honour hands this . placed have day copy a senators from I inform Houses has of General the to to Excellency Governor caused Honourable my
 to this His I , inform day his Excellency two delivered from to to the of a General the in Houses Parliament . that copy have senators placed Governor has the my you Speech the of honour be hands Honourable caused Throne
 the that caused you two of His to of Excellency Throne from inform copy . the placed this in honour to has day be hands I a , Parliament senators Governor have his my Speech delivered Honourable the General the to Houses
 you has the Speech caused be from I hands two have , to His the of honour this Houses Honourable to Throne my General that copy of senators his placed delivered Governor the in . Excellency inform the a to Parliament day
 inform that I his Throne General have the the to Houses placed this in Speech has hands day His the from , senators delivered the Excellency Honourable Parliament of of Governor you caused a to to my two . be copy honour
 from delivered two his General you Honourable , the His Parliament to has I a hands placed inform . Houses of the be Speech have senators Excellency to the the caused in copy of day that my Governor Throne honour this to
 Houses be you of the to General I that in Speech , from inform senators His Governor have Excellency two my to of . hands placed delivered Throne has the his honour the to copy day the this a caused Parliament Honourable
When you talk about "accountability," I would suggest that that is second best. 
It is not a perfect situation, although you will have a parliamentary committee taking some responsibility. 
It is better than nothing but, in my opinion, it is second best.  
I am fairly sure that, in one way, the pure accountability we are talking about is quasi-impossible. 
Have different people manage different funds so that we will have some evaluation, some comparison and some diversification.  
Hon. Michael A. Meighen :
Honourable senators, this is precisely where I wanted clarification. 
Are you recommending that the fund be divided into four $25-billion portions and that so many firms administer each $25-billion portion in its entirety? 
Or are you recommending that one firm be responsible for one sector, such as the real estate sector and another firm be responsible for another sector?  
Senator Bolduc :
Honourable senators, in my opinion, it could be by sector, but my preference would be for the total to be broken down into four portions covering a variety of investments. 
Otherwise, if you have a block of $25 or $30 billion in real estate, you know what that means. 
Senator Meighen :
You mentioned decentralizing the decision-making process, did you not? 
Do you see any advantage to having decision-making centres such as the firm handling the $25-billion segment being located in different parts of the country?  
Senator Bolduc :
In Quebec, when the problem came up in connection with the pension plan in 1966, we insisted on having our own plan. 
I am not saying that this is how it should be across Canada; that is not my point. 
What I am saying is that, in Quebec, at the time, Jean Lesage had made it very clear that the fund was designed to provide social security. 
That is why we fought so hard for the Caisse de dépôt et placement at the time: to have this flexibility.  
 Honourable senators , I have the honour to inform you that His Excellency the Governor General has caused to be placed in my hands a copy his Speech delivered this day from the Throne to the two Houses of Parliament .
 in of honour this inform my hands day two be to the have Throne Governor the senators to from , General that you Parliament has of I to placed his a copy delivered Speech Houses His Excellency the caused . Honourable
 Governor senators General in Speech of Houses Excellency has inform hands I the honour day his to Parliament . from this caused , Honourable a His have the to the that placed be copy Throne to of delivered you my two
 the his Governor Throne to the you in His Houses has Parliament be honour that Honourable delivered the to have , two copy of of I the to from a Speech Excellency my day hands senators placed General . caused this
Hon. Senators :
 Hon : Senators .
 Hon Senators : .
 Senators Hon . :
 Senators : Hon .
 Hon Senators : .
 : Senators Hon .
 Senators . : Hon
 Senators Hon . :
 Senators Hon : .
 Hon . : Senators
 : . Senators Hon
 Senators . : Hon
 . : Hon Senators
 : Hon Senators .
 Hon : Senators .
 Senators Hon . :
I would like an answer to this good question.  
Another question concerns the interprovincial competition that can be expected. 
It is obvious that the provinces which used to benefit from preferential rates from the federal fund will pay the going price in future. 
They will borrow, but at a higher rate. 
The increase in debt servicing costs will inflate each province's budget.  
As far as business investment is concerned, will the populations of the provinces agree to have their savings used for businesses in other provinces at the expense of their own? 
Will the provincial governments be tempted to influence the investment board to serve their interests? 
A moment ago I said that when a government agency, a public office, is created, there is a risk of politicizing the process.  
Participation in business, with such enormous amounts, cannot be limited to a few major companies - the Canadian market is not all that big - but will also extend to a multitude of medium-sized businesses. 
The available funding will be sufficient to invest in hundreds of medium-sized businesses. 
In Quebec, for example, if I remember correctly from its last report, the Caisse de dépôt already invests in almost 800 Quebec businesses.  
Now, how are these 800 to be selected and monitored? 
There is likely to be arbitrariness and patronage.  
In addition, the Board will be everywhere and inevitably set conditions. 
Businesses will have to toe the line as the provinces do when Ottawa doles out conditional funding, as you may recall. 
This concentration of power, this centralization will be unhealthy. 
This technocracy and its perverse effects make me nervous. 
I hope one day we will have nothing worse than Mr. Sorros' manoeuvres to criticize.  
The regulations governing investments and the behaviour of administrators have not been revealed. 
They are not ready. 
 . Senators :
 Senators . :
 Hon : .
 Senators : .
Dispense.  
 . Dispense
 . Dispense
 Dispense .
 Dispense .
 . Dispense
 Dispense .
 Dispense .
 . Dispense
 Dispense .
 . Dispense
 . Dispense
 Dispense .
 Dispense .
 . Dispense
 . Dispense
 . Dispense
It might be a military secret, as a matter of fact.  
Federal-Provincial Relations 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Atlantic Provinces Equal to Increase in Social Transfers-Government Position 
Hon. Brenda M. Robertson :
Honourable senators, I have a supplementary that goes back to questions raised by the Honourable Senator DeWare. 
I will come back to this again tomorrow and the next day.  
I should like to know from the Leader of the Government in the Senate whether the cuts we discussed yesterday in the social transfer payments for Atlantic Canada represent the increases in the social transfers that were announced twice previously by this government? 
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
No, not that I am aware, but it is an interesting question. 
I will bring forth an answer.  
Delayed Answers to Oral Questions 
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, I have a response to a question raised in the Senate on November 25, 1997, by the Honourable Senator Oliver regarding changes to the Canada Pension Plan and the Investment Board; a response to a question raised in the Senate on November 19, 1997, by the Honourable Senator Oliver regarding the Investment Board not being subject to Access to Information; a response to a question raised in the Senate on October 23, 1997, by the Honourable Senator Kinsella regarding commemoration of the 50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights; a response to a question raised in the Senate on November 20, 1997, by the Honourable Senator Forrestall regarding the lack of helicopters for a number of navy frigates; and a response to a question raised in the Senate on November 20, 1997, by the Honourable Senator Spivak regarding the demolition of government laboratories and the possibility of a restoration of funding.  
Human Resources Development 
Changes to Canada Pension Plan-Accountability and Transparency of Investment Board-Undertaking to Publish Quarterly Financial Statements-Government Position 
(Response to question raised by Hon. Donald H. Oliver on November 25, 1997) 
Bill C-2 requires that the Board prepare unaudited quarterly statements and provide them to the federal and provincial Ministers of Finance. 
The Board may choose to make those statements directly available to the public but the legislation does not require this.  
During the consultations on the draft CPP legislation, including House of Commons Finance Committee hearings, several pension fund experts recommended against publishing quarterly statements. 
They argued that the routine publication of quarterly results could tend to draw attention away from the longer-term investment objectives of the Board. 
 .
 .
 .
 Dispense
The Hon. the Speaker :
 . : Hon the The Speaker
 the Hon Speaker : . The
 the Hon . Speaker The :
 The Speaker : Hon the .
 : Speaker Hon . the The
 the The . Hon Speaker :
 : . Hon the The Speaker
 Hon The Speaker . the :
 The Hon . : Speaker the
 the The Speaker . Hon :
 Speaker The the Hon : .
 The Hon Speaker the : .
 the The . : Speaker Hon
 Speaker Hon the : . The
 Hon . : The the Speaker
 The : Hon Speaker the .
Are you recommending that the fund be divided into four $25-billion portions and that so many firms administer each $25-billion portion in its entirety? 
Or are you recommending that one firm be responsible for one sector, such as the real estate sector and another firm be responsible for another sector?  
Senator Bolduc :
Honourable senators, in my opinion, it could be by sector, but my preference would be for the total to be broken down into four portions covering a variety of investments. 
Otherwise, if you have a block of $25 or $30 billion in real estate, you know what that means. 
Senator Meighen :
You mentioned decentralizing the decision-making process, did you not? 
Do you see any advantage to having decision-making centres such as the firm handling the $25-billion segment being located in different parts of the country?  
Senator Bolduc :
In Quebec, when the problem came up in connection with the pension plan in 1966, we insisted on having our own plan. 
I am not saying that this is how it should be across Canada; that is not my point. 
What I am saying is that, in Quebec, at the time, Jean Lesage had made it very clear that the fund was designed to provide social security. 
That is why we fought so hard for the Caisse de dépôt et placement at the time: to have this flexibility.  
I am not saying this practice should be generalized and extended to Ontario or any other province; it may cause problems I had not thought of so far. 
There is no doubt that it could be more difficult for some provinces. 
I do not exclude however the idea that provincial politicians could bring pressure to bear on this organization so that, when investments are made, people from each region benefit. 
To what extent will ethics and conflict of interest rules be overlooked? 
My experience tells me and I can tell you that it is going to be complicated.  
Hon. Terry Stratton :
Honourable senators, I should like participate in the debate on Bill C-2, the Canada Pension Plan.  
 Hon . the Speaker :
 . the : Speaker Hon
 the The . : Speaker
 . Speaker Hon : the
Honourable senators, when shall this Speech be taken into consideration?  
 be ? shall consideration taken this , when Speech Honourable senators into
 consideration taken senators when be into Speech shall Honourable this , ?
 shall Honourable consideration into taken senators , ? Speech when this be
 senators , when shall ? into Honourable be Speech this consideration taken
 this Speech be shall consideration taken Honourable into senators when ? ,
 into be when senators this shall taken Honourable consideration ? , Speech
 be senators Honourable consideration into this ? Speech when , shall taken
 shall taken senators into , ? Speech this when be Honourable consideration
 , shall senators consideration this Honourable when Speech taken into be ?
 consideration Honourable this senators when into ? Speech be shall taken ,
 be into shall taken this Honourable senators consideration Speech when ? ,
 shall this Honourable Speech taken be consideration when senators ? into ,
 be senators , shall consideration when ? Honourable Speech this taken into
 be this senators into , Honourable ? consideration shall Speech when taken
 taken Speech shall Honourable senators this be into ? when , consideration
 into Honourable taken Speech this ? be when consideration senators shall ,
As the witness said, there would be a superimposition of organizational structures. 
The same thing would happen in Quebec City. 
This would create unnecessary costs and complications in the annual registration of students, the assignment of personnel, the distribution of resources and the establishment of voters' lists.  
Some of the witnesses who appeared before the special joint committee seem to think that the debate on education that has been going on for over 30 years in Quebec is not only about freeing the Government of Quebec of the restrictions resulting from paragraphs (1) to (4) of section 93. 
But even if that were the case, in the five extensive public consultations carried out over the past five years, the reform of public education in Quebec was the major issue - and it is the organizational structures guaranteed by section 93 which obviously are impeding this reform. 
This very public debate necessarily raised the question of whether the Constitution should be amended to solve this problem.  
After hearing the witnesses, the committee was satisfied that a majority of Catholic and Protestant parents - the two groups concerned - supported the amendment to section 93.  
One aspect of the issue that was frequently mentioned is the Quebec National Assembly's unanimous support of Bill 109 and the amendment to section 93. 
Such unanimous votes are significant, but they do not mean there is a consensus in the Catholic and Protestant communities, whose privileges are at stake. 
Such unanimity in the Quebec National Assembly proves nevertheless that support for the amendment transcends party lines. 
The PQ government was reluctant to propose that amendment, because it involved using the amending formula provided for in the Constitution Act of 1982, which that government refuses to recognize. 
The government finally yielded to the pressures from Liberal opposition members.  
Some people were concerned that the debate on national unity might detract from the substance of the amendment. 
If the only concern of the special joint committee had been to prove that "federalism works," it would not have insisted on hearing this evidence showing that there was a consensus among Catholic and Protestant parents. 
From the very beginning, the Government of Quebec assured this Parliament that there was an appropriate consensus in favour of the amendment in that province. 
However, the committee insisted on assessing and challenging these statements - so much so that the Quebec ministers responsible for education and for intergovernmental affairs eventually appeared before the committee, along with the official opposition critics on these matters. 
Clearly, what was - and still is - at issue is the legitimacy of the amendment.  
It was mentioned repeatedly that, as a result of the Supreme Court decisions, it has become obvious that the rights that are positively guaranteed under section 93 are not as broad as they were originally assumed to be. 
However, we do not believe that the amendment was justified because the denominational education rights guaranteed under section 93 were nothing more than empty shells. 
Had we been satisfied that the majority of Catholics or Protestants in Quebec were opposed to the amendment, it would not have mattered whether or not their rights carried much weight. 
 Honourable senators , when shall this Speech be taken into ?
 this , when ? shall senators Honourable into Speech consideration be
 taken shall Honourable when ? senators into Speech consideration , be
 ? this shall Honourable when into taken be , consideration Speech
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Acting Deputy Leader of the Government) moved: 
 Carstairs : ) . Hon Leader Government the Acting moved ( Deputy of Sharon
 moved Deputy ( of Hon the Leader ) : Carstairs Acting Government . Sharon
 the of ( Acting ) Deputy Carstairs Leader Hon Government . moved Sharon :
 of Sharon Hon Leader ( ) moved the Government : Carstairs Acting Deputy .
 Leader : moved Deputy of ( . Sharon Government the ) Hon Acting Carstairs
 ( Hon moved Deputy Sharon Government : Carstairs Leader the Acting of . )
 the Leader ( moved of ) : Deputy Hon . Acting Carstairs Sharon Government
 Deputy Sharon Acting . the of Carstairs ) Government : Leader Hon moved (
 : ( Hon Government Acting Carstairs Sharon of Deputy . the moved ) Leader
 Government Sharon Acting moved ( : the Carstairs ) Deputy Leader Hon . of
 the : Acting of moved Carstairs Sharon Hon ( ) . Leader Government Deputy
 ) Sharon : Deputy Leader Carstairs Acting the ( moved Hon . of Government
 . ( Government ) Hon Carstairs Acting moved Sharon the Leader : Deputy of
 moved of : . Government Deputy ) ( Carstairs Hon Acting Sharon the Leader
 Deputy Acting Government ) Leader of Carstairs ( Sharon Hon : . moved the
 Leader Deputy : ( ) Sharon Acting Carstairs Government . moved the of Hon
(Response to question raised by Hon. J. Michael Forrestall on November 20, 1997) 
An eleventh detachment is required for Canada's full time commitment of one ship to NATO's Standing Naval Force Atlantic.  
Maritime Command employs a three-tiered approach to fleet readiness: ships fulfilling national commitments are at High Readiness; ships in refit or major maintenance periods are at Extended Readiness; and, the remainder of the fleet is at Normal Readiness. 
Ships at Normal or Extended Readiness do not normally require Sea King detachments to fulfill their operational role. 
As well, certain taskings such as sovereignty, coastal and fisheries patrols may not require a Sea King detachment. 
Therefore, ships can be deployed at sea and operationally ready for a mission without a Sea King detachment embarked.  
Forestry 
Demolition of Government Laboratories-Possibility of Restoration of Funding-Government Position 
(Response to question raised by Hon. Mira Spivak on November 20, 1997) 
In response to the federal government's Program Review, the Canadian Forest Service (CFS) underwent strategic restructuring to rationalize its operations and to reduce infrastructure costs in the interest of providing maximum funding to research within the context of a reduced operating budget. 
As a consequence, Petawawa National Forest Institute (PNFI) was identified as one of the several Natural Resources Canada (NRCan) operations to be closed as part of a redefined departmental initiative to refocus our Science and Technology (S&T) programs. 
These programs address issues of national and international significance and service our clients through stronger, more effective partnerships with the provinces, industry and other players in the forest sector. 
All the major programs from PNFI have been transferred to the five current CFS research Centres and accordingly the majority of basic research activities from PNFI are ongoing. 
Claims of expenditure for upgrades prior to decommissioning were in fact for operational maintenance, purchase of equipment and some site enhancements. 
With the closure of the site all research equipment and transportable assets relevant to ongoing program activities have been moved to other CFS research Centres with their respective researcher's programs.  
The final phase of deconstruction has been delayed twice in order to seek alternate tenants for the townsite. 
The site in its current state represents a safety risk both in terms of security and liability and requires significant annual expenditures for heating and infrastructure to simply be maintained.  
Answers to Order Paper Questions Tabled 
Energy-Department of the Environment-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) table the answer to Question No. 13 on the Order Paper-by Senator Kenny.  
 Hon Sharon Carstairs ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Government ) moved :
 ( ) the Leader Acting moved Carstairs Government . Hon : Sharon of
 : Carstairs the of Acting moved Deputy Hon ) Leader Sharon . (
 Acting Sharon ) the Carstairs moved Hon ( Government . Leader of :
That the Speech of His Excellency the Governor General, delivered this day from the Throne to the two Houses of Parliament, be taken into consideration at the next sitting of the Senate.  
 be Speech , sitting delivered two this . the taken Excellency Governor from the the That Houses General His consideration the Senate into to at of of next the Throne , of the Parliament day
 consideration , His the the sitting Throne at of That into from the Senate two the the next taken the Houses be . this Excellency , day Parliament to Governor Speech General delivered of of
 Speech the consideration taken this be His of Throne delivered Senate the to General Governor Parliament sitting the , Excellency the into two Houses , of next at . That from the the day of
 Parliament of into the the Throne Governor Houses of the of , Excellency taken , to Senate day That be this Speech sitting General from next consideration the His the . delivered at the two
 . Speech Excellency , the into to the Throne the be day , consideration the next at the of Governor General That Senate Houses from two delivered His the sitting Parliament taken this of of
 Houses to the General Parliament day His Speech the sitting into consideration Excellency at taken two Senate That Throne Governor from , the this be the the of . of of next the , delivered
 the sitting from General day taken That this , of Excellency the Speech the . His Parliament the of be next , Houses the Throne two at Governor the of Senate delivered consideration into to
 be two the the this delivered taken of to His the Houses Governor of That from day at General Throne , Senate consideration next , the sitting . the the Excellency into Parliament Speech of
 Speech Houses . taken at Excellency the the That to the His consideration , Senate into the the two from Throne Parliament sitting this the General delivered of next of , of Governor day be
 consideration next to into be Speech delivered this the the Excellency , Senate Governor the of at Houses of the day That His two taken the Parliament General sitting from the , . of Throne
 the to . Excellency General be Speech at into Houses Throne the delivered sitting of Parliament , Governor next day the from this Senate the taken That His , the the of two of consideration
 Throne to the Speech . Senate taken His the delivered Houses sitting That the the General day at this of of be , from Governor the Excellency the , Parliament next into consideration of two
 , of from Parliament That the Excellency consideration the taken be next to two of the the into Senate sitting the Throne of . at Speech Houses day General the delivered , this Governor His
 the into delivered of Excellency the General two Senate Parliament , of Speech of day this to consideration Houses Governor the His sitting the from taken be the Throne That the at , . next
 Throne Speech Governor , day the the Senate consideration General of . the delivered to taken Excellency the of sitting Parliament the Houses His two the this That , next from be into of at
 of the consideration Senate . be day Governor the of this at the Throne Houses two delivered sitting Speech into the the , , from Parliament next of taken His Excellency to That the General
As a result, it tended to stray from the substance of the reference before it. 
"Religious education," "religious instruction," "denominational schools," "confessional schools," "linguistic rights," "minority rights" and other terms were used so often that they tended to become interchangeable to the point that they occasionally melded together.  
Section 93 was a result of a compromise at a time when two religious beliefs dominated everyday life in Canada to an extent hard to describe today when even one's most difficult moral decisions are usually self-determined, rather than imposed without question by a recognized higher authority. 
In 1867, Catholics and Protestants were guaranteed certain privileges which were not even considered for other religious denominations. 
Their numbers and influences were such that the idea that a section 93 was nothing else but a deserved right did not even arise.  
In the early 1980s, when a Canadian constitution was being debated, section 93 remained as it was written in 1867, despite the fact that Canadian society had evolved to the point where the debate we are now having should have been held then. 
Even more to the point, the authors of the Constitution Act recognized that section 93's limitations to two privileged Christian beliefs would conflict with the Charter's anti-discrimination implications, so much so that section 93 was provided immunity from the Charter in section 29. 
Indeed, section 29 could not be clearer. 
It reads as follows: 
Nothing in this Charter abrogates or derogates from any rights or privileges guaranteed by or under the Constitution of Canada in respect of denominational, separate or dissentient schools.  
Why the issue of confessional schools as well as other issues crying out for change, such as Senate reform, were left untouched during the long debate before and during patriation and surrounding the Constitution Act itself is for those who were there at the time to explain. 
Certainly a golden opportunity was lost to give Canada a basic law more in tune with modern Canadian society, except for the adoption of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 
Even it is not without its flaws, not the least being the notwithstanding clause which can be subjected to abuse. 
Perhaps all of this is a reflection of the one constant which has marked Canada since its origins, a country identified by its extraordinary political and social diversity and contradictions.  
In any event, we are faced with a request from the Quebec National Assembly to be removed from the obligations to maintain formal Catholic and Protestant school structures in the cities of Montreal and Quebec City and to maintain minority or dissentient Catholic and Protestant schools outside those areas at the request of minority Catholic or Protestant parents, as the case may be. 
Provincial legislation to establish linguistic schools is already being put into effect. 
These can be established without amending section 93. 
Quebec, however, points out that to have multiple school systems can only lead to overlapping, duplication, and confusion, with all their attendant additional costs.  
In addition, religious education as provided for in section 93 is reconfirmed in the province's Education Act, which by itself may be reassuring at first glance, but not in reality as it is a protection which is simply not as iron-clad as a constitutional guarantee.  
When the Education Act, Bill 107, was passed in 1994, the National Assembly agreed to apply the notwithstanding clause so that the privileges given to denominations in section 93 could not be successfully challenged under the Charter. 
 That the Speech of His Excellency the Governor General , delivered day from the Throne to the two Houses of Parliament , be taken into consideration at the next sitting of the Senate .
 Senate of Governor , of into Houses day Excellency Throne two the at Parliament His the That the delivered taken of . to Speech General the , sitting the next the from this consideration
 the of Houses consideration the Senate at . from of That taken delivered this to Excellency Speech day Throne sitting the two the , Governor Parliament the be of General the into next ,
 General of the delivered the next Throne this Senate sitting taken Governor , of to of , day That the from two Parliament be Houses at the . the consideration His Speech the into
Motion agreed to.  
 agreed to . Motion
 agreed . Motion to
 . Motion agreed to
 Motion . to agreed
 Motion to . agreed
 . Motion to agreed
 to . agreed Motion
 . Motion to agreed
 agreed to Motion .
 Motion agreed . to
 Motion . to agreed
 . Motion agreed to
 to agreed Motion .
 agreed Motion to .
 to . agreed Motion
 agreed . to Motion
This is the official Quebec policy, from the Department of Education, on confessional schools and services under the new linguistic board system. 
It states: 
The change from religion-based to language-based school boards does not mean that all Québec schools will become secular. 
Each institution will have the option of maintaining or reviewing its current status as a Catholic or Protestant school. 
Students will continue to take religion courses or to receive pastoral animation or religious care and guidance services if they so desire.  
Before the end of the third year after the linguistic school boards are in place, the schools will be asked to consult the parents and decide whether or not they wish to maintain their confessional status.  
Those unfamiliar with Catholic and Protestant school boards in Montreal and Quebec City should know that in many cases, particularly in the Protestant system, it is the language of instruction which predominates. 
Many schools have little, if any, religious content, while in others it is very strong. 
Parents already have a say in how much religion they want their children exposed to and that will continue under the new system.  
While section 93 guarantees are only a matter of religious denominations, the essential characteristics of the resulting Quebec school system have, nonetheless, been linguistic. 
One does not speak often of going to a Catholic or Protestant school any more. 
One usually speaks of going to a French or an English school. 
It was inevitable, then, that the committee would be drawn into a debate on how the amendment of section 93 might affect linguistic rights, particularly those claimed by the minority.  
While section 23 of the Charter establishes minority linguistic education rights, Quebec is not bound by all its provisions and so has adopted legislation in this field which, in effect, creates two classes of English-speaking Quebecers as it distinguishes between those educated in Canada and those educated elsewhere. 
Only those parents educated in English in Canada can pass on the benefit of minority English language education to their children. 
Those Quebec parents who were educated in English outside of Canada must have their children educated in French. 
We have in Quebec two classes of English-speaking Quebecers.  
Quebec has been repeatedly criticized for this discrimination, and rightly so. 
How this undesirable situation developed can be traced to the then Minister of Justice, who is Prime Minister today.  
I will quote from his book, Straight from the Heart , where Mr. Chrétien describes how he was responsible for exempting Quebec from the crucial parts of section 23. 
 Motion to .
 Motion . agreed
 agreed Motion to
 to agreed Motion
Committee of Selection 
 Selection of Committee
 Committee Selection of
 of Committee Selection
 of Selection Committee
 Committee of Selection
 of Selection Committee
 Committee Selection of
 of Committee Selection
 Selection of Committee
 Selection Committee of
 Selection Committee of
 Selection of Committee
 of Committee Selection
 Committee of Selection
 of Committee Selection
 Selection Committee of
This is why, in all wisdom, we must not "put all our eggs in one basket," as the old saying goes. 
Ought we not to have a number of baskets instead, so that any one bad decision will not be a huge disaster?  
This diversification of investments is wise; ought it not to be institutionalized in the law, and ought not the number of independent responsibility centres for investments to be increased?  
My third point concerns the relationship between the government, the Minister of Finance in particular, and the agency in question. 
It will always be tempting to use these funds to finance governments, at lower rates than if it had been invested in the open market. 
That is, in fact, what has been done since 1996 under the present system. 
It must be ensured that a conflict of interest of this kind is not permitted at all. 
I will return to this shortly.  
My fourth point concerns investment policy. 
The law should provide that the administrators of the fund are responsible for ensuring contributors a reasonable pension, while providing them with the best return, that is, the safest and best return possible.  
Canada's economy represents about 2.5 per cent of the world economy. 
So it would be wise to permit the fund not only to diversify its investments in stocks and bonds but also to invest worldwide. 
Diversification of values, in a variety of instruments, in various sectors, in different countries and currencies is thus a measure of wisdom and judgement to be left to those in charge, who must, of course, be accountable for their actions.  
Honourable senators, it would be tempting for the administrators to act as investors on occasion by investing in all sorts of businesses with their judgement either arbitrary or verging on patronage. 
We have seen this in Quebec. 
There must be strict rules to prevent this sort of thing, if we want to avoid regrettable misuse.  
The matter of the pension plan's objectives is basic. 
In this respect, the legislation must be clear. 
The board must first and foremost look after the interests of the contributors whose income security depends on its performance to a large extent.  
The history of the Quebec Caisse de dépôt et placement warrants examination in this regard. 
 Committee Selection
 Committee Selection
 Committee of
 Selection Committee
Appointment 
 Appointment
 Appointment
 Appointment
 Appointment
 Appointment
 Appointment
 Appointment
 Appointment
 Appointment
 Appointment
 Appointment
 Appointment
 Appointment
 Appointment
 Appointment
 Appointment
What is in it for anyone to rush this bill through Parliament by December 19? 
No reasonable explanation has been given to me, and I am sure no reasonable explanation has been given to my honourable friends, other than the PMO, Mr. Goldenberg and Mr. Martin, telling you to pass this bill by December 19. 
They are telling you not to think about the consequences, because they are right. 
How do we know they are right? 
Why not take more time, honourable senators?  
Senator Gigantès :
Having listened to you, we know they are right.  
Senator Tkachuk :
Why not take the time - 
Senator Gigantès :
And the tedium?  
That is what we need to tell them at Christmas when we go home; not that we passed the bill.  
Hon. Roch Bolduc :
Honourable senators, I will not go back over the very important points raised by my colleague with respect to the intergenerational inequity in this bill. 
I would like to look at other aspects of the problem.  
Honourable senators, the government is proposing to amend the CPP. 
I would have found it appropriate to examine all the major aspects of the plan at this time. 
This has been done for some important facets such as its survival, its management and its performance. 
I will address these shortly.  
This strikes me as an important question. 




Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Acting Deputy Leader of the Government ) moved: 
 Hon . ) Carstairs Sharon Deputy moved of : Acting Leader ( the Government
 Deputy Government moved . the Leader Carstairs : ( ) Sharon of Acting Hon
 of Hon Leader Deputy Carstairs . : Government moved ( ) Acting the Sharon
 the Government Deputy Hon moved Leader ) Acting Carstairs : . ( of Sharon
 of Carstairs Leader ) Acting Sharon moved ( Deputy the : Government . Hon
 Hon Acting ( moved ) Leader the Deputy . Carstairs Sharon of : Government
 Carstairs ( . Leader Deputy ) Government the moved : Hon of Acting Sharon
 moved Leader Government of Sharon Acting : ) . Deputy ( the Hon Carstairs
 Deputy : . moved ) ( Leader Government of Carstairs Sharon Hon the Acting
 of the Leader moved Hon Carstairs : Sharon ) Acting ( Deputy Government .
 Hon Sharon Deputy Carstairs : Leader ( . the of ) Government Acting moved
 of Acting Deputy moved Leader Hon : . Sharon ( Government the Carstairs )
 the of Leader Carstairs moved : ( . Deputy Government ) Sharon Hon Acting
 moved ) : Hon Sharon ( Leader Carstairs Acting . of the Government Deputy
 Government ) Deputy the Hon moved Acting of : Sharon ( Leader . Carstairs
 ( moved . of Carstairs Leader ) Sharon Acting Deputy the : Government Hon
Honourable senators, I have a problem. 
Offhand, I do not know if you can amend a reasoned amendment. 
I must look at the precedents. 
Debate adjourned to await the ruling of the Speaker. 
Quebec 
Linguistic School Boards-Amendment to Section 93 of Constitution-Report of Special Joint Committee Adopted 
On the Order: 
Resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Pépin, seconded by the Honourable Senator Lucier, for the adoption of the Report of the Special Joint Committee to Amend Section 93 of the Constitution Act, 1867 concerning the Quebec School System, deposited with the Clerk of the Senate on November 7, 1997.  
Hon. John Lynch-Staunton (Leader of the Opposition) :
Honourable senators, I would like first of all to thank the co-chairmen of the joint committee, our colleague Senator Lucie Pépin, and the other co-chairman, MP Denis Paradis, for their excellent work in rather exceptional and sometimes trying circumstances.  
In fact, as has been said here and elsewhere, considering the decision of the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs that government support for the amendment to section 93 of the Constitution was already an established fact and that the government majority in committee left no doubt as to what conclusions it would reach, the committee's role could have been limited to that of a rubber stamp.  
Furthermore, the committee was not allowed to hold hearings outside Ottawa and was required to table its report no later than November 7, 1997, with only three weeks to hear witnesses and prepare its report. 
What a contrast with the extremely slow process followed by many less important bills that gather dust for months on parliamentary shelves before receiving Royal Assent.  
In his November 27, 1997 speech, Senator Wood gave a very good description of the strait-jacket in which the joint committee had to work. 
Everything was rushed. 
No announcements were made that hearings were being held, contrary to what is usually done. 
The list of witnesses changed almost from hour to hour. 
Some witnesses had only a few hours' notice that they would be appearing before the committee, and their presentations suffered as a result, as they said themselves.  
Under such conditions, it was quite normal that participation in the committee could have been interpreted as sanctioning the conditions imposed by and for the government. 
However, this was an issue that was worth risking this false interpretation, because the Parliament of Canada is dealing with a request from the Quebec National Assembly, with its sovereignist majority, to exempt Quebec from certain constitutional obligations it has had to live with for 130 years.  
 Hon . Sharon Carstairs ( Acting Deputy Leader of Government ) moved :
 Government ( Acting . : Carstairs Leader of the Sharon Deputy ) moved
 . moved Carstairs Deputy Sharon ( of the Leader Hon Acting Government )
 Leader of . Sharon Carstairs Government ) Acting Hon moved Deputy : (
Motion agreed to.  
 . Motion agreed to
 Motion agreed . to
 agreed . Motion to
 . to Motion agreed
 agreed to . Motion
 . Motion to agreed
 to . Motion agreed
 agreed Motion . to
 to . Motion agreed
 . Motion agreed to
 . Motion to agreed
 to Motion agreed .
 agreed Motion to .
 to Motion . agreed
 Motion agreed to .
 agreed to . Motion
I do not see any.  
Senator Grafstein :
Honourable senators, there is constitutional law. 
Quebec wants to proceed by the rule of law. 
They are seeking to renovate their system under the rule of law and the Constitution.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
That is not my question.  
Senator Grafstein :
I assume that if they choose to proceed, they can. 
However, why should we in the Senate allow any province to proceed in a way that we consider unlawful? 
If there is an amendment to the Constitution, each senator in his or her heart and mind, after reviewing the testimony, must come to a conclusion. 
He or she can either vote for, against or abstain from the vote on the resolution.  
They want to be under the law, as does the Province of Newfoundland. 
They want to be under the Constitution. 
If they meet the standards of a constitutional change, I, for one, will support them, notwithstanding the fact that I mistrust their motivation and mistrust what they say. 
However, on matter of dealing with the rule of law, I am bound by the rule of law.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
My question has nothing to do with that answer. 
It was renewed in 1982 and given protection from the Charter. 
Quebec has finally adopted a linguistic school system that looks very promising and can be implemented without section 93 being amended, unlike Newfoundland, which needs an amendment to Term 17 to be able to implement a non-denominational system. 
 Motion agreed to
 . to agreed
 agreed . to
 agreed Motion to
Business of the Senate 
 the Senate of Business
 of Business the Senate
 of Business Senate the
 the Business of Senate
 of the Senate Business
 Business Senate the of
 Senate the of Business
 of Senate Business the
 the Senate Business of
 Business the of Senate
 Senate of Business the
 Business the Senate of
 Business Senate the of
 Business of the Senate
 Business of the Senate
 Business Senate of the
Given their authorship, I think we have to reflect seriously on these thoughts.  
Before we finally vote, honourable senators, I trust that when the resolution itself is before us we can go into Committee of the Whole to hear any witness who was not heard by the joint committee and whose reflections will guide us. 
In particular, I refer to the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs who, after all, is the sponsor of this resolution on behalf of the Government of Canada. 
He is as well placed as anyone to reply to concerns expressed here and elsewhere. 
I would expect that he would welcome the opportunity to do so before a vote is taken.  
I feel strongly that the minister must share his views with this house and engage in an open and frank exchange directly with its members. 
I urge the leadership on the other side to arrange such a meeting at the earliest opportunity.  
There are still too many unanswered questions and disturbing uncertainties for many senators on both sides of this house to state a firm position at this time. 
The minister should be able to provide assurance, the lack of which so far has caused many of us here to remain hesitant to support this resolution, myself included.  
Hon. Jerahmiel S. Grafstein :
Honourable senators, education is everyone's business. 
When citizens debate their children's education, sometimes passion overwhelms reason.  
It was with some trepidation that I entered the thicket of the Quebec school question, coming as I do from the province of Ontario. 
The dense history of the Quebec school question holds lessons for us all.  
Once appointed to the committee, I set about to better understand the tangled roots of history lying beneath this question, to digest as best I could the numerous articles, studies and especially reports commissioned by successive Quebec governments over the last few years ranging from the articulate Parent commission to the Kenniff report to the findings of the Estates General. 
It became evident to me that a deep and thorough consensus had developed for radical reformation, at least among the elites of Quebec. 
Claude Ryan, an old friend of mine and the then Minister of Education, had galvanized that reform process over a decade ago in Quebec. 
It was equally clear to me that the existing school structures were in desperate need of renovation, particularly in light of the overlapping school structures in Quebec and the financial restraints facing all governments.  
Rather than an historic essay, perhaps it would be simpler if I could share with you my thought processes and the evidence I found as a member of the Standing Senate Committee on the Quebec Resolution Requesting Constitutional Change.  
First, a brief word about committees and their work. 
 Business of Senate
 Business of the
 Senate Business of
 Senate Business the
Adjournment 
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
 Adjournment
We heard from the opposition in the assembly; the Quebec government itself; English and French school boards; Catholic, Protestant and other teachers' groups; archbishops of the Roman Catholic church and the Anglican archbishop of Quebec, which I will deal with later; minority groups including Jewish, Arab, non-Roman Catholic and other allophone groups; students groups, both English and French. 
All agreed that linguistic school boards, which were a direct consequence of this amendment, were desirable and progressive.  
There was some dissent. 
I will briefly touch on it, as did Senator Bolduc in his most insightful speech, especially with respect to the plight of certain French-speaking Protestants and certain English-speaking Catholics. 
There is no question at all that some in those groups feel detrimentally affected.  
Again, under the current Quebec law 109, the notwithstanding clauses had been included, both with respect to the Quebec Charter and the federal Charter of Rights and Freedoms, therefore allowing for denominational teaching to be continued in Quebec. 
How the Quebec government will ultimately continue to afford opportunities for denominational teaching is a much more difficult question to predict. 
However, it is clear to me, from all the evidence I heard and carefully cross-examined, that the majorities of the so-called minorities favoured this change. 
There appeared to be some exceptions at the outset that must be addressed.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, I regret to interrupt but the allotted 15 minutes has expired. 
Is leave granted for Senator Grafstein to continue?  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
Senator Grafstein :
Alliance Quebec, the foremost, mainstream English group, appeared at first to oppose section 93. 
However, on cross examination - and this is the value of the committee hearings - their interest was not so much in opposing section 93. 
Rather, their interest was focused on the failure of section 23(1)( a ) of the Charter to be proclaimed in Quebec. 
As Senator Lynch-Staunton put it so well, it means that there are in effect two classes in Quebec as it presently pertains. 
If you are English speaking and you come from outside of Canada, your children will be streamed by the Quebec government into the French-language stream. 




Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Acting Deputy Leader of the Government) :
 . of Sharon ( : Hon Acting Deputy ) the Leader Carstairs Government
 ( Acting Carstairs Sharon . of Government the ) Leader Hon : Deputy
 the Leader ( Carstairs : Sharon ) Government Deputy Acting of . Hon
 Carstairs Sharon . ) : Acting Leader ( Government of the Deputy Hon
 . ) Sharon : Deputy of Acting Leader Government the Hon ( Carstairs
 of Government Deputy Hon Acting Carstairs Sharon Leader : . ( ) the
 ) Hon Sharon ( : of Government Carstairs the Leader Acting Deputy .
 Leader Sharon of the : Deputy . ( ) Government Hon Acting Carstairs
 Hon the Acting Deputy ( Carstairs Government Leader : of Sharon . )
 ) Acting Leader of the Sharon Government Deputy : Hon . Carstairs (
 ) Acting Hon Deputy ( : the Carstairs Sharon of Government . Leader
 Hon Sharon the Government of Acting : Carstairs Leader ( ) Deputy .
 Government Carstairs the of Deputy Leader Acting Hon . ( Sharon : )
 . ( of Deputy Government : Hon Sharon ) Carstairs Leader Acting the
 ( Leader Hon Government ) Sharon the Carstairs of . Deputy Acting :
 Sharon the . of Carstairs Leader Government Hon ( Deputy ) : Acting
However, they are not constitutionally related and, in any case it seems entirely ill-advised to reduce consent for constitutional change to a mere transaction where one right serves as a bargaining chip for the improvement of another.  
Honourable senators, I strongly urge you to support this resolution. 
Although we noted there was a consensus to amend section 93, we felt the real issue was the quality of the education of children in Quebec, and on that point opinion was unanimous.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Senator Robichaud, allow me to correct an impression that you left and to ask you a question. 
However, I wanted to make this correction, because you referred to the "government in place", when in fact it was the Liberal government of the day that made the decision, over the objections of the Parti Québécois then in opposition.  
I am asking you the same question I asked Senator Grafstein, but to which I did not get an answer. 
Why is it so important to exempt Quebec from section 93 to allow it to reform its school system? 
What is the connection between the two?  
Senator Robichaud :
Let me give you my version of the facts. 
When we heard witnesses from Quebec, including school board officials, parents and teachers, some of them told us that, in its present form, section 93 brings about a superimposition of structures, particularly in the Montreal region. 
These people told us that this was preventing authorities from providing the best possible services. 
These people also told us they wanted the resolution to be passed before the end of the year so they could start long-term planning. 
They would really appreciate having some time to implement these changes.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
I do not want to unduly prolong the debate, but I have another question for Senator Robichaud. 
Since we did not get answers to certain questions, would you agree to invite the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs, who is the sponsor of this resolution, to appear before the Senate in committee of the whole? 
We would like him to give us certain assurances before we make a decision on this issue?  
Senator Robichaud :
 Hon . Carstairs ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Government ) :
 ( Sharon Carstairs of Deputy ) Hon : Acting Leader Government .
 Government Carstairs . : Sharon Hon ( the of Leader Acting Deputy
 Sharon Acting Carstairs Deputy ) ( Hon of Leader the . :
Honourable senators, with leave of the Senate, and notwithstanding rule 58(1)( h ), I move: 
 leave 1 the , h Senate with senators notwithstanding move : )( of and , ), ( rule I 58 Honourable
 ( 1 rule )( with , notwithstanding : Senate and Honourable I the move ), 58 , h senators leave of
 leave : , and I 1 notwithstanding , )( Honourable ( senators Senate of h rule with ), the 58 move
 1 move : senators , rule , I of 58 with Senate and leave ( Honourable the notwithstanding ), h )(
 , 1 notwithstanding of ), move leave senators , with the Senate rule )( 58 and ( Honourable I : h
 notwithstanding I leave rule 58 ), with , )( 1 of ( the and , : Honourable Senate senators h move
 , move 1 with , leave Honourable of ), I rule the : )( ( senators notwithstanding 58 Senate and h
 the senators notwithstanding ), move Honourable )( h leave 58 ( 1 , with rule : I of , Senate and
 with I of , senators rule move 58 ), the Senate ( 1 : , leave and )( notwithstanding Honourable h
 ), , : notwithstanding the h 58 1 and I move with , rule Honourable Senate senators )( leave ( of
 : with 58 h senators the , rule and leave ), I move , 1 of ( notwithstanding )( Honourable Senate
 Senate ), with and h Honourable : the leave ( senators )( 1 move , , I notwithstanding rule 58 of
 Senate ( rule the Honourable senators )( and 58 h ), I leave of notwithstanding : move , 1 , with
 notwithstanding Senate senators 58 , move 1 Honourable of the h ( with I leave : , rule )( and ),
 leave rule and ), 1 : move Honourable ( I with of )( the 58 , senators notwithstanding h Senate ,
 I rule Honourable move )( of , with leave notwithstanding and h , : ), the 58 1 Senate senators (
Unfortunately, almost nothing has been said by the negotiators as to how they will handle these extremely important issues that impact on all the coastal communities of Canada.  
As a supplementary, would the minister also advise whether the government negotiators have been consulting with the fishing industry on this subject? 
If so, what has been the government's position in relation to the fishing industry?  
Senator Graham :
The answer, honourable senators, is that they have been consulting with the fishing industry. 
I believe the position of the industry is exactly as suggested by my honourable friend. 
That is something else that I will have clarified for him.  
National Defence 
Search and Rescue Helicopter Replacement Program-Possible Cabinet Discussion on Awarding Contract for Helicopter Purchase-Government Position 
Hon. J. Michael Forrestall :
Honourable senators, did the cabinet consider the awarding of a contract for new search and rescue helicopters this morning? 
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, my honourable friend would be the first to recognize that it is not appropriate for me to comment on any discussions that took place in cabinet this morning. 
Hon. Lowell Murray :
Would it be appropriate for the honourable minister to let us know whether it was considered last week?  
Senator Graham :
The matter of the helicopters is under active consideration by the government.  
Cabinet met last Thursday. 
Senator Forrestall :
If that is the last cabinet meeting before the Christmas break, I gather we will not see any decision until sometime in the new year.  
 Honourable senators , with leave of the Senate , notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 )( h ), I move :
 )( notwithstanding ( 58 with h I , leave of : move ), , 1 Senate the senators Honourable and
 Senate 1 ), h , Honourable I move notwithstanding 58 and )( of leave the : , with senators (
 notwithstanding Senate h ), senators and move of ( leave , 1 , I the 58 rule )( Honourable with
That when the Senate adjourns today, it do stand adjourned until Tuesday, September 30, 1997 at 2 p.m. 
 . 30 adjourned , Tuesday That do September p when , the adjourns . Senate , 2 at today it m 1997 stand until
 1997 , today when , . Senate stand do September adjourns p 2 it the until . at That 30 adjourned , Tuesday m
 today . until That , adjourns do the stand . when m it , 1997 p adjourned Tuesday 2 30 , at September Senate
 That , 2 until Senate the m September adjourned , today stand when adjourns 30 , at do p it Tuesday . . 1997
 the do , at That adjourned 2 . it 1997 Senate until Tuesday p when 30 m adjourns stand , today , September .
 . September Senate until do . Tuesday 2 stand 1997 adjourns adjourned , That 30 when p at , m the , it today
 . until do , Senate it 2 , the when Tuesday adjourned September at today 1997 30 That , . p stand m adjourns
 p , today adjourned when 2 the m Tuesday do . until Senate , adjourns 30 1997 . at September , That stand it
 , it 2 adjourned , , 30 today That . adjourns until stand do at Senate m Tuesday p 1997 the . when September
 30 the September until p . 1997 That 2 . Senate today , adjourned Tuesday it adjourns when , m stand at do ,
 , 30 stand 1997 . today until . it at Tuesday the m adjourns adjourned , 2 do , when That p September Senate
 That , , today when 1997 2 . . adjourned the adjourns stand it September do p at Senate , Tuesday until m 30
 Tuesday the when 30 1997 September . do at . until adjourns Senate m 2 , , today stand it , adjourned p That
 p when 1997 . That 2 the Tuesday today at do 30 September until stand it adjourns adjourned , Senate , , m .
 , 2 30 adjourned . the it at p m stand Senate adjourns . , September until 1997 do , Tuesday today when That
 m stand do today adjourned . , until adjourns 1997 Senate , , September That 2 the . when Tuesday p 30 it at
If the request speaks to a Tuesday or a Thursday, when we normally meet at 2 p.m. and sit a little longer, there would be no difficulty, all things being equal, in granting leave. 
However, I am having some difficulty in granting leave for a day when we are supposed to be having a short day in any event.  
I would ask the honourable Chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee if he would explain his motion in light of the fact that Wednesday is a short day.  
Senator Stewart :
Honourable senators, there are two points:
First, we are hoping tomorrow to have a timely assessment of the achievements of the APEC meetings.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Watch out for the pepper spray!  
Senator Stewart :
The second point relates to the request for permission to meet tomorrow at 3:15 p.m. although the Senate may be then sitting. 
If I felt secure in the prognosis that the Senate would rise at three o'clock - which is the assumption on which we base our start time of 1:30 p.m. - I certainly would not undertake to put forward this motion. 
However, past experience suggests that, notwithstanding the fact that we do meet on Wednesdays at 1:30 p.m., we often sit well beyond three o'clock. 
On one occasion we had witnesses waiting for upwards of an hour.  
Senator Kinsella :
Thank you, Senator Stewart.  
Perhaps I might address the Deputy Leader of the Government, then. 
By way of recapitulation, this issue is important for all honourable senators. 
A request for leave has been made by the Chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee to allow that committee to sit tomorrow, Wednesday, even though the Senate may then be sitting. 
The issue is that Wednesday, in our common understanding, was to be a short day to allow committees to sit on Wednesday afternoons.  
Not just today but at other times, Senator Stewart has brought to our attention the fact that committees operate on that assumption and arrange their business plans, only to be frustrated in executing their business plan by the Senate going way beyond 3:00 or 3:30 p.m. on Wednesday afternoons.  
 That when the Senate adjourns today , do stand adjourned until Tuesday , September 30 , 1997 at 2 p . m .
 stand when at 2 do September 1997 m , adjourns That adjourned 30 the , it . . Tuesday until , Senate today
 Senate 1997 when 2 until . 30 at adjourned Tuesday , it September m the That , . stand , do p adjourns
 p . today until , Senate That do , adjourns 30 the it 2 . , September 1997 stand m adjourned at Tuesday
The Hon. the Speaker :
 Speaker The Hon the : .
 : Hon The . the Speaker
 . Hon the Speaker The :
 Hon . The : the Speaker
 . The Speaker : Hon the
 The : Hon Speaker the .
 Hon The Speaker the : .
 the Hon The . : Speaker
 The Hon Speaker . the :
 the Hon The . Speaker :
 Speaker The . Hon : the
 Speaker the Hon : . The
 The Hon the Speaker . :
 . The Hon : the Speaker
 . : Hon the Speaker The
 The Hon the Speaker . :
There is no great hurry for this bill to get through, at least not to the degree that you could not do that. 
Why not insist that your government take our committee out there to talk to your people?  
Senator Chalifoux :
We talked to the Conservative government about that for many years and nothing was done.  
Senator Comeau :
We are not in power now. 
You should push your people.  
On motion of Senator Gigantès, debate adjourned.  
Canada Cooperatives Bill 
First Reading 
The Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C-5, respecting cooperatives.  
Bill read first time.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
When shall this bill be read the second time?  
On motion of Senator Carstairs, bill placed on Orders of the Day for second reading on Thursday next, December 11, 1997.  
Bill to Amend-Second Reading-Motions in Amendment-Debate Adjourned to Await Ruling of Speaker 
On the Order: 
Resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Moore, seconded by the Honourable Senator Ferretti Barth, for the second reading of Bill C-16, An Act to amend the Criminal Code and the interpretation Act (powers to arrest and enter dwellings), 
And on the motion in amendment of the Honourable Senator Cools, seconded by the Honourable Senator Sparrow, that the motion be amended by deleting all the words after "That" and substituting the following therefor: 
"Bill C-16, An Act to amend the Criminal Code and the Interpretation Act (powers to arrest and enter dwellings), be not now read a second time because 
 The . the Speaker :
 Hon : Speaker the .
 : Speaker The the Hon
 Speaker . Hon The the
Honourable senators, is leave granted?  
 ? granted senators leave , Honourable is
 granted Honourable , senators is ? leave
 ? leave Honourable senators , granted is
 leave is granted , senators Honourable ?
 Honourable granted ? is leave senators ,
 Honourable leave granted senators is ? ,
 leave Honourable granted senators ? is ,
 , senators granted leave Honourable is ?
 granted Honourable , leave is senators ?
 senators , Honourable granted is leave ?
 granted is leave , ? Honourable senators
 leave ? granted is Honourable senators ,
 senators is Honourable , leave granted ?
 senators leave , Honourable ? is granted
 is ? , leave granted Honourable senators
 ? is Honourable leave granted senators ,
and whereas section 43 of the Constitution Act, 1982 provides that an amendment to the Constitution of Canada may be made by proclamation issued by the Governor General under the Great Seal of Canada where so authorized by resolutions of the Senate and House of Commons and of the legislative assembly of each province to which the amendment applies; 
now therefore the Senate resolves that an amendment to the Constitution of Canada be authorized to be made by proclamation issued by His Excellency the Governor General under the Great Seal of Canada in accordance with the schedule hereto.  
SCHEDULE 
AMENDMENT TO THE CONSTITUTION OF CANADA 
CONSTITUTION ACT, 1867 
The Constitution Act, 1867, is amended by adding, immediately after section 93, the following: 
"93A. 
Paragraphs (1) to (4) of section 93 do not apply to Quebec." 
CITATION 
2. This Amendment may be cited as the Constitution Amendment (year of proclamation) (Quebec).  
The special joint committee on which I have the honour to sit was given the mandate of studying the proposed amendment to section 93. 
Today, we have before us the resolution to amend section 93 of the Constitution Act, 1867.  
Briefly put, I support this resolution. 
I am also convinced that the majority of Catholic parents in Quebec who enjoy the guarantees provided under section 93 support this amendment, as do the majority of Protestant parents, who are in the same situation.  
However, the Quebec National Assembly will no longer be subject to legislation predating Confederation with respect to denominational instruction.  
These laws of Quebec that predate Confederation and concern Catholic and Protestant denominational schools have led to the creation of an unusual system, which gave Catholic and Protestant parents different rights, according to where they lived in the province.  
Catholic and Protestant school boards are thus to be found protected by the Constitution within the old limits of Montreal and Quebec City. 
Elsewhere in the province the Catholic school boards are not protected by the Constitution, except in predominantly Protestant districts, where Catholic parents are in the minority.  
Outside Montreal and Quebec City, the Constitution protects Protestant school boards if, in a district with a Catholic majority, the Protestant parents are in the minority.  
Honourable senators, educational reform has been a concern of Quebec governments for over 30 years. 
 senators , is leave granted ?
 granted Honourable leave is senators ,
 granted Honourable , ? leave senators
 ? is , Honourable granted leave
Hon. Senators :
 Hon Senators . :
 Hon . Senators :
 Hon . Senators :
 Senators : Hon .
 Hon Senators . :
 . Senators Hon :
 : Hon . Senators
 . Hon Senators :
 . : Senators Hon
 Senators : Hon .
 Hon : Senators .
 . : Senators Hon
 . Hon : Senators
 : Hon . Senators
 Hon Senators : .
 : Hon Senators .
Joint committees of this sort benefit the government, not Parliament, as they are limited in both latitude and independence by the government's control over their agenda. 
This is not meant as a reflection on the work done by the co-chairmen or those who participated on the committee, who I again thank for their excellent work, in particular the co-chairmen, for they toiled under difficult circumstances. 
It is a comment on the concept itself and one, I gather, which can also be applied to the joint committee which has just completed its study of the proposed amendment to Term 17.  
Should joint committees become the rule rather than the exception, and two-thirds of the membership is drawn from the House of Commons, how can one expect sober second thought to win even persuasive arguments? 
That is why it is essential that a constitutional amendment be thoroughly reviewed by the Senate, otherwise we will be party to the Commons always having its will on us.  
The following, taken from the joint committee report, was not included as an afterthought, I can assure honourable senators: 
Sixteen Members of the House of Commons, and seven Senators, were named to this Special Joint Committee. 
Some of those Senators have stated that their participation in the Committee must in no way be seen as absolving them, or their Senate colleagues, from the Senate's constitutional obligation to assess any amendment proposed to the Constitution of Canada.  
I am already hearing cries of alarm from those who will claim that the Senate, by adopting this attitude, will cause a delay which could compromise the reforms the Government of Quebec has in mind. 
I would like to remind those with such concerns that the reforms are already happening, are far advanced even, and do not need amendment of section 93 to reach their conclusion.  
The amendment to section 93 will do away with the confessional school boards and the dissentient boards only, and these will have to stay in place until the end of the current academic year early next summer.  
Hence the argument that it is essential for Parliament to make a decision before the end of the year has no justification.  
I hope that honourable senators will not be taken in by the specious argument that the sooner we approve the resolution, the more we will show how well the federation works. 
That is a sentiment which was trumpeted ad nauseum by government supporters following the adoption of the resolution in the other place. 
It is a sentiment which is certainly not shared by members of the Quebec government. 
Constitutional amendments affect all Canadians, even if their immediate impact is felt in only one region of the country. 
They must not be treated lightly, particularly as they affect minorities. 
The federation's value lies in this country's historic respect for the individuality of minorities and for their desire not to have this individuality crushed by the numerical weight of the majority.  
What we are being asked to do in the final analysis is remove constitutionally guaranteed rights, as discriminatory as they may be by today's standards, and entrust them to a province which will honour them for a given period, with no guarantee that they will be incorporated on a permanent basis. 
The National Assembly has endorsed this unanimously, as did most witnesses who stayed with the issue, with varying degrees of enthusiasm. 
 Hon . Senators
 : Hon Senators
 . Hon :
 : . Hon
Agreed.  
 Agreed .
 Agreed .
 . Agreed
 . Agreed
 . Agreed
 Agreed .
 Agreed .
 Agreed .
 . Agreed
 . Agreed
 Agreed .
 Agreed .
 . Agreed
 . Agreed
 . Agreed
 . Agreed
Senator Graham :
The matter of the helicopters is under active consideration by the government.  
Cabinet met last Thursday. 
Senator Forrestall :
If that is the last cabinet meeting before the Christmas break, I gather we will not see any decision until sometime in the new year.  
Senator Graham :
If that is a question, I would hope my honourable friend is wrong, and that I am correct in saying that it is to be hoped that there will be a decision before the end of this year.  
Senator Forrestall :
Cabinet will meet again, then. 
I am pleased to hear that.  
Search and Rescue Helicopter Replacement Program-State of Sea King Helicopter Fleet-Government Position 
Hon. J. Michael Forrestall :
Where are the other six? 
Are they on ships at sea? 
We have 30 in the inventory.  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, the answer is yes, there are 30 helicopters in the inventory. 
As I indicated yesterday, 24 were cleared, and six remain to be inspected. 
They will be inspected by December 18.  
Of the 24 that were inspected, only two were found to be in need of repair. 
 Agreed
 Agreed
 .
 .
Motion agreed to.  
 . agreed to Motion
 to . agreed Motion
 . agreed to Motion
 agreed . to Motion
 . to agreed Motion
 Motion . to agreed
 to agreed . Motion
 . agreed Motion to
 to . agreed Motion
 . agreed to Motion
 to . agreed Motion
 to agreed Motion .
 agreed . Motion to
 agreed Motion . to
 Motion . to agreed
 . to agreed Motion
Since we did not get answers to certain questions, would you agree to invite the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs, who is the sponsor of this resolution, to appear before the Senate in committee of the whole? 
We would like him to give us certain assurances before we make a decision on this issue?  
Senator Robichaud :
Honourable senators, the minister who is the sponsor of the resolution has already appeared before the joint committee. 
He came at the beginning and at the end of the hearings, and my honourable colleague was there to ask him questions on the issues that were of concern to him.  
If the honourable senator did not get answers to all his questions, that is an entirely different matter. 
On motion of Senator Kinsella, for Senator Simard, debate adjourned.  
Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration 
Sixth Report of Committee Adopted 
The Senate proceeded to consideration of the sixth report of the Standing Committee on Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration (budgets for certain committees), presented in the Senate on December 4, 1997.  
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, I move, on behalf of Senator Rompkey, the adoption of this report.  
Motion agreed to and report adopted.  
Telecommunications Act Teleglobe Canada Reorganization and Divestiture Act 
Bill to Amend-First Reading 
The Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C-17, to amend the Telecommunications Act and the Teleglobe Canada Reorganization and Divestiture Act. 
Bill read first time.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this bill be read the second time?  
On motion of Senator Carstairs, bill placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading on Thursday, December 11, 1997.  
 Motion agreed to
 Motion to agreed
 . to agreed
 agreed . to
The Senate adjourned to Tuesday, September 30, 1997, at 2:00 p.m. 
 2 , at , . : , Senate Tuesday 30 1997 September to p . m The 00 adjourned
 : . Tuesday 30 Senate at p The , , to 00 1997 2 September , m adjourned .
 September Senate , 2 , 00 , 1997 Tuesday . adjourned : m The to . p 30 at
 Tuesday , 00 The p 1997 30 , at adjourned September . Senate : , m 2 . to
 , to , 30 1997 Tuesday . September . m The 2 at , p Senate 00 adjourned :
 The 30 , , Tuesday 1997 p : at Senate adjourned September . 2 . , to 00 m
 Senate , , The : . m p 2 . Tuesday 00 September adjourned 1997 to 30 , at
 , 00 September adjourned . 30 , 1997 Senate . to p 2 m , : Tuesday at The
 at 00 to p The 30 . Senate , 2 , m , Tuesday : 1997 September adjourned .
 . September 00 to , , Tuesday , at m : 2 adjourned Senate 1997 . p The 30
 to . m adjourned September 2 , 00 The 30 , : at 1997 . p , Senate Tuesday
 2 Tuesday to , Senate 1997 , 30 p : at The . , . m adjourned September 00
 m The adjourned to , , 1997 . at Senate , : Tuesday 30 September . p 00 2
 , , 30 p adjourned to 2 , September Tuesday 1997 . m Senate : 00 . at The
 The p adjourned . , m . 1997 , 00 Senate 2 to , 30 : September Tuesday at
 September p . 00 . m , Senate , to adjourned , Tuesday 2 at The 1997 : 30
Let me for a moment repeat what we heard. 
There was a unanimous resolution, save for two abstentions, from the Quebec assembly. 
We heard from the opposition in the assembly; the Quebec government itself; English and French school boards; Catholic, Protestant and other teachers' groups; archbishops of the Roman Catholic church and the Anglican archbishop of Quebec, which I will deal with later; minority groups including Jewish, Arab, non-Roman Catholic and other allophone groups; students groups, both English and French. 
All agreed that linguistic school boards, which were a direct consequence of this amendment, were desirable and progressive.  
There was some dissent. 
I will briefly touch on it, as did Senator Bolduc in his most insightful speech, especially with respect to the plight of certain French-speaking Protestants and certain English-speaking Catholics. 
There is no question at all that some in those groups feel detrimentally affected.  
Again, under the current Quebec law 109, the notwithstanding clauses had been included, both with respect to the Quebec Charter and the federal Charter of Rights and Freedoms, therefore allowing for denominational teaching to be continued in Quebec. 
How the Quebec government will ultimately continue to afford opportunities for denominational teaching is a much more difficult question to predict. 
However, it is clear to me, from all the evidence I heard and carefully cross-examined, that the majorities of the so-called minorities favoured this change. 
There appeared to be some exceptions at the outset that must be addressed.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, I regret to interrupt but the allotted 15 minutes has expired. 
Is leave granted for Senator Grafstein to continue?  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
Senator Grafstein :
Alliance Quebec, the foremost, mainstream English group, appeared at first to oppose section 93. 
However, on cross examination - and this is the value of the committee hearings - their interest was not so much in opposing section 93. 
Rather, their interest was focused on the failure of section 23(1)( a ) of the Charter to be proclaimed in Quebec. 
 The Senate adjourned to Tuesday , September 30 , 1997 at 2 : 00 p . m .
 Tuesday , p . September The to : 1997 00 . at , Senate 2 , adjourned m
 : . September The at 30 2 00 . , m p 1997 Senate , Tuesday , adjourned
 . . adjourned 2 30 September 1997 , to : Senate m 00 Tuesday p at , The
Debates of the Senate (Hansard) 
 ( Senate Debates ) the of Hansard
 Hansard ( Senate Debates ) the of
 Debates Senate the of Hansard ) (
 the Senate of ( ) Hansard Debates
 ( ) Hansard the Debates Senate of
 the Senate ( Debates ) of Hansard
 Hansard Debates ( Senate of ) the
 the Debates Senate of ) Hansard (
 ) Hansard of Senate Debates the (
 ( of Senate ) Hansard Debates the
 Debates of the ( Senate ) Hansard
 of the ( Hansard ) Senate Debates
 Debates the of Senate ( ) Hansard
 Senate Debates the ) ( Hansard of
 ) Debates ( the Hansard of Senate
 Senate Hansard ) of the Debates (
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
Senator Stratton :
Thank you, senators.  
In the Financial Post or The Globe and Mail it was recently explained that, as employers will have to pay higher CPP premiums and as most employers or companies have a limited budget for wages, they will have to pass on the cost to people through the price of their product, or they will have to lay people off, or they will have to go to contract workers.  
The concern is the long-term effect this huge increase will have on full-time jobs.  
On November 18, Senator Oliver said: 
Canadians who turn 69, 70, and 71 this year have only another month and a half to convert their RRSPs to an annuity or a RRIF. 
If they fail to do so, they could lose up to one-half of every dollar they have in their RRSPs to taxes; yet many of these same Canadians are not aware that the government has lowered the age to 69 and of the deadline for making the conversion.  
Indeed, a survey conducted last spring found that only about 30 per cent of RRSP holders aged 50 to 70 were aware of these new rules. 
Bearing this in mind, and considering the confusion that now exists about this matter, will the government consider extending the conversion time so as to ensure that no senior citizen is forced to hand over half of his or her life savings as a result of being caught off-guard by this proposal?  
In other words, will the government ensure that they are not nailed with more taxes?  
Senator Oliver continued: 
We were told that the net tax grab from this and other measures that restrict tax assistance for retirement savings, notably yet another freeze in RRSP contributions, would total about $40 million this year and $175 million next year. 
We were not told how much of that came from lowering the age for RRSP conversions.  
When that many Canadians are unaware of what is happening, we have a severe problem.  
On November 20, I said: 
Honourable senators, I wish to address my question to the Leader of the Government in the Senate. 
It dates back to October 1, 1997, to a question asked at that time by Senator Meighen, which is only 51 days ago.  
I will quote Senator Meighen, who said: 
 Debates of Senate ( Hansard )
 ) Senate Debates the ( Hansard
 Senate of Debates ( the )
 Hansard the of ( ) Senate
1st Session, 36th Parliament, 
 , Session , Parliament 1st 36th
 , Session , 36th 1st Parliament
 Session Parliament , , 36th 1st
 , , Parliament Session 1st 36th
 , 36th 1st Session Parliament ,
 , , Parliament 1st Session 36th
 Parliament Session 1st , , 36th
 Parliament , 36th Session , 1st
 Session Parliament , 36th , 1st
 , 36th Session Parliament 1st ,
 Parliament , 1st Session 36th ,
 36th Session 1st Parliament , ,
 , 1st , Parliament 36th Session
 Parliament , 36th Session , 1st
 , 1st Session 36th Parliament ,
 , Parliament 36th 1st , Session
I will not go into that aspect of this debate. 
It would take half an hour, but I would be pleased to do so privately with any senator who is interested.  
The evidence we heard was extensive, definitive and clear. 
Let me quickly review the committee's evidence that brought it to conclude that there was a strong majority of the so-called minorities affected.  
We had a unanimous resolution in the National Assembly of Quebec, both parties, with two abstentions. 
The efforts made by the Quebec ministers seem to assure that a strong consensus had been obtained.  
We heard direct evidence from 68 groups composed of over 100 individual witnesses. 
Notwithstanding the short time-frames allotted in our terms of reference and as referenced by Senator Lynch-Staunton, the committee clearly heard every viewpoint that people wished to express.  
I hear Senator Wood. 
I will deal with her concerns in a moment.  
While some individual groups did not give evidence, as pointed out by Senator Wood, I concluded that, having examined the materials from those groups, that their viewpoint was indeed expressed by others during the course of those hearings. 
I believe no viewpoint was excluded from our deliberations.  
The time frames in the hearings in no way diminished the committee's ability to obtain or weigh the evidence. 
The committee made a thorough investigation of that evidence. 
No point of view went unexamined, save for one raised by the Reform Party at the last minute, and I will deal with that later.  
Let me for a moment repeat what we heard. 
There was a unanimous resolution, save for two abstentions, from the Quebec assembly. 
We heard from the opposition in the assembly; the Quebec government itself; English and French school boards; Catholic, Protestant and other teachers' groups; archbishops of the Roman Catholic church and the Anglican archbishop of Quebec, which I will deal with later; minority groups including Jewish, Arab, non-Roman Catholic and other allophone groups; students groups, both English and French. 
All agreed that linguistic school boards, which were a direct consequence of this amendment, were desirable and progressive.  
There was some dissent. 
 1st Session 36th Parliament ,
 36th , Session 1st Parliament
 , , Parliament 1st Session
 36th , Parliament Session 1st
Volume 137, Issue 3 
 Issue Volume 137 3 ,
 3 Volume , 137 Issue
 3 , 137 Volume Issue
 137 Issue , 3 Volume
 137 , Issue 3 Volume
 137 3 Issue , Volume
 3 , Volume 137 Issue
 , Volume 137 3 Issue
 Volume Issue 3 137 ,
 Issue Volume 137 , 3
 Issue Volume 137 , 3
 137 3 Volume , Issue
 , 3 Issue 137 Volume
 , 3 137 Volume Issue
 Volume 3 , 137 Issue
 137 Volume , 3 Issue
Paul Martin is a real smart guy. 
We remember that he had to stoop to bribing three Atlantic provinces, with other people's money, to fulfil his promises of harmonization. 
He later apologized to the Canadian people for misinforming them.  
Meanwhile, the Prime Minister and Deputy Prime Minister, Sheila Copps, were promising to get rid of the GST, but they did not really mean it, they said, although they were caught out on tape not telling the truth.  
Paul Martin promised in the old Red Book that the government would cancel the helicopter purchase and use the money to pay for more social programs. 
Now, $900 million later, we have no helicopters that fly safely. 
He penned the Red Book to renegotiate the free trade agreement. 
He took all the kudos after the 1993 election.  
Now he says: "Rush Bill C-2. 
Trust me." 
The minister says that he needs the bill now to satisfy an agreement with the provinces. 
I have heard of no agreement. 
No one here has heard of an agreement. 
If someone on the other side knows of an agreement, please tell me.  
We have not heard one province asking us to abandon our parliamentary responsibilities and rush this bill through by January 1 on the threat that they will cancel their agreement. 
The Minister of Finance is rushing so that he can get another $400 million in taxes for the 1997 tax year. 
The brunt of this bill is being borne by middle- and lower-income workers.  
Merry Christmas Canada. 
Let us give Canadians a Christmas present by defeating this bill. 
Let us kill the bill.  
 Volume 137 Issue 3
 Issue 3 , Volume
 3 Volume Issue 137
 Volume , 137 Issue
Tuesday, September 30, 1997 
 1997 Tuesday , , September 30
 1997 , , Tuesday 30 September
 1997 September Tuesday 30 , ,
 Tuesday September , , 1997 30
 Tuesday 1997 September , , 30
 Tuesday , September , 30 1997
 , 1997 Tuesday 30 September ,
 1997 , Tuesday , September 30
 September 1997 Tuesday 30 , ,
 September , , Tuesday 1997 30
 1997 , September 30 Tuesday ,
 Tuesday September , , 1997 30
 30 September Tuesday , , 1997
 Tuesday , 1997 September , 30
 , September 1997 , 30 Tuesday
 Tuesday 30 , September 1997 ,
Sometimes even two, three or four committees are sitting when we are sitting. 
That is an improper practice.  
If the deputy leader could guarantee to us that, on Wednesdays from now on - and we will strive to be cooperative - we will sit no later than 3:30 p.m., unless there is a proven urgency, then I think Senator Stewart's motion is in order. 
However, we need that assurance first.  
Senator Carstairs :
Let me assure the Leader and Deputy Leader of the Opposition that we will do everything on our part to ensure that sessions end on time. 
We did sit yesterday, which was a Monday. 
I can assure senators we will be sitting next Monday in order to fulfil the business of the chamber before the Christmas break.  
Senator Kinsella :
On that basis, I do not think leave is necessary.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is leave granted?  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
He just felt it was not necessary.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Leave is granted.  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is it your pleasure, honourable senators, to adopt the motion?  
 Tuesday , 30 , 1997
 , , 30 Tuesday September
 , 1997 , September Tuesday
 30 , 1997 , September
The Honourable Gildas L. Molgat, Speaker 
 Gildas , The Speaker Honourable L . Molgat
 The . , Speaker Honourable Molgat L Gildas
 Molgat L The , Gildas Speaker . Honourable
 . The Molgat Honourable Speaker Gildas , L
 . The Speaker , Molgat Gildas Honourable L
 L . Gildas Speaker Molgat Honourable , The
 Honourable L Gildas Speaker . The Molgat ,
 L . Gildas The Honourable Speaker , Molgat
 . L Honourable The , Gildas Speaker Molgat
 L Speaker Honourable Molgat . The Gildas ,
 Honourable Gildas , L The Speaker . Molgat
 Gildas Speaker Honourable The Molgat . L ,
 Molgat The Speaker Gildas , . L Honourable
 Speaker . Honourable L , The Gildas Molgat
 . Molgat Gildas Honourable L Speaker , The
 Molgat Honourable Gildas Speaker , The . L
Senator Grafstein :
Honourable senators, I would refer my colleague to the transcript. 
Read the transcript. 
If there is a dispute about evidence, rather than taking my word or that of the honourable senator opposite - with whom I do disagree - senators should read the transcript. 
The transcript will speak for itself.  
Senator Lavoie-Roux :
I think all senators would have wanted to read the transcript, but we did not have enough time.  
The minister appeared before the committee on November 4. I asked him if he felt that minorities would be as well protected by section 23 of the Charter as they were by section 93 of the Constitution, and he said that they would not be as well protected.  
Senator Grafstein :
He and I have a different viewpoint on section 23(1)( a ) of the Charter.  
Hon. Dalia Wood :
Honourable senators, I have a question for the honourable senator.  
I do not agree with the concept of my honourable friend's consensus. 
Le Fédération des comités des parents de la province de Québec is a group mandated by the National Assembly to represent all parents and all schools in Quebec. 
They appeared before the committee. 
The president, Mr. Gary Stronach, when asked if the membership was aware, stated - and this is in his letter - that he did not ask his membership for their views. 
He said that he did not ask the parents whether they were for or against the amendment to section 93.  
This is one of the largest groups in Quebec. 
If Mr. Stronach is part of the "for" or "against" theory, then there is a problem with the whole concept put forth by my honourable friend.  
My honourable friend spoke of the Estates General, but he did not refer to their minority report, which covered over 70 per cent of their membership. 
 The Honourable Gildas L Molgat , Speaker
 L , . The Gildas Honourable Molgat
 The , L . Honourable Speaker Molgat
 L , Speaker . Gildas The Honourable
Table of Contents 
 Table of Contents
 Table Contents of
 of Table Contents
 Contents of Table
 Table of Contents
 Table Contents of
 Table of Contents
 of Table Contents
 Table Contents of
 of Contents Table
 Table of Contents
 Table Contents of
 Contents of Table
 Contents Table of
 Contents of Table
 Table of Contents
QUESTION PERIOD 
Federal-Provincial Relations 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Province of Quebec-Request for Particulars 
Hon. Fernand Roberge :
Honourable senators, my question follows the announcement made yesterday regarding the government's decision to set at $12.5 billion the cash floor for transfer payments made under the Canada health and social transfer (CHST). 
The government would have us believe that this amount represents an increase in health care payments. 
However, the figures indicate otherwise.  
The following year, in 1999-2000, they will only be $3.748 billion. 
Yet, the government claimed yesterday that it was implementing a stable transfer system. 
In fact, cash payments paid to Quebec for health and education will be reduced by over $300 million over a five-year period. 
Honourable senators, I remind you that these cuts are in addition to this year's reduction of $700 million compared to last year. 
Could the minister make inquiries and inform the Senate of the reasons why, in spite of a cash floor set at $12.5 billion, Quebec's share will diminish by $307 million over the next five years?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
The federal government cut its own spending earlier, more drastically and in greater measure than transfers to the provinces. 
The government has made it clear that it will use increased fiscal flexibility to make strategic investments in priority areas, and action was taken early and directly on that commitment based on favourable fiscal results that emerged this past spring.  
With respect to individual provinces, I do not have those numbers. 
However, I would be happy to provide them for my honourable friend.  
Senator Roberge :
Could the minister find out at the same time why, in the same time period, Ontario's share of the cash transfers will increase to $173 million?  
Senator Graham :
 of Contents
 of Table
 Table of
 Table Contents
THE LATE JOHN M. MACDONALD 
 . M MACDONALD THE LATE JOHN
 JOHN . M THE LATE MACDONALD
 JOHN MACDONALD THE . LATE M
 THE MACDONALD M LATE . JOHN
 M THE JOHN . MACDONALD LATE
 MACDONALD THE M LATE JOHN .
 MACDONALD . THE M JOHN LATE
 . LATE JOHN THE MACDONALD M
 . MACDONALD THE JOHN LATE M
 THE . LATE JOHN M MACDONALD
 JOHN M LATE THE MACDONALD .
 JOHN THE MACDONALD LATE . M
 M THE . LATE MACDONALD JOHN
 THE MACDONALD JOHN LATE M .
 M . MACDONALD THE JOHN LATE
 THE LATE MACDONALD M . JOHN
But the right to dissentience that was guaranteed under section 93 of the Constitution will no longer be protected. 
The opinion of the Parti Québécois on this is known, and that is why it is a bit awkward.  
Senator Grafstein :
There are two parts to my honourable friend's question.  
I say, "Yes."  
Once we pass this amendment, it will be for the province of Quebec and those in the Province of Quebec to decide their educational architecture.  
I should like the province of Alberta to do things the way we do them in Ontario. 
Fat chance when it comes to education! 
Honourable senators, I think we have fulfilled our constitutional responsibilities if each senator is individually satisfied that a reasonable test of the majority of the minorities has been achieved. 
Under the evidence presented to us - not outside the room, but before us - that was clear. 
In that respect, I support the report and the resolution.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
It was moved by the Honourable Senator Pépin, seconded by the Honourable Senator Lucier, that this report be adopted.  
Is it your pleasure, honourable senators, to adopt the motion?  
Motion agreed to and report adopted, on division.  
Quebec 
Linguistic School Boards-Motion to Amend Section 93 of Constitution-Debate Adjourned 
Hon. Fernand Robichaud , for Senator Graham, rose pursuant to notice of Thursday, October 2, 1997: 
Whereas the Government of Quebec has indicated that it intends to establish French and English linguistic school boards in Quebec; 
and whereas the National Assembly of Quebec has passed a resolution authorizing an amendment to the Constitution of Canada; 
 THE LATE JOHN M MACDONALD
 MACDONALD M THE LATE JOHN
 MACDONALD M JOHN LATE .
 M LATE . MACDONALD THE
Tributes 
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
If there is an amendment to the Constitution, each senator in his or her heart and mind, after reviewing the testimony, must come to a conclusion. 
He or she can either vote for, against or abstain from the vote on the resolution.  
They want to be under the law, as does the Province of Newfoundland. 
They want to be under the Constitution. 
If they meet the standards of a constitutional change, I, for one, will support them, notwithstanding the fact that I mistrust their motivation and mistrust what they say. 
However, on matter of dealing with the rule of law, I am bound by the rule of law.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
My question has nothing to do with that answer. 
It was renewed in 1982 and given protection from the Charter. 
Quebec has finally adopted a linguistic school system that looks very promising and can be implemented without section 93 being amended, unlike Newfoundland, which needs an amendment to Term 17 to be able to implement a non-denominational system. 
The two resolutions are completely different in content and intent.  
Again, my question relates to the fact that the new linguistic school board process is well under way. 
There will be elections to the boards in June. 
What impact does the modification of section 93 or the non-modification of section 93 have on what is already under way?  
Senator Grafstein :
Again, honourable senators, there are two solitudes here. 
I believe that education, in pith and substance, is a provincial matter.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
That is not the question.  
Senator Grafstein :




The Late Honourable Pietro Rizzuto 
 Late The Rizzuto Pietro Honourable
 Honourable The Pietro Rizzuto Late
 Late Rizzuto Honourable Pietro The
 Pietro Honourable The Late Rizzuto
 Rizzuto The Late Honourable Pietro
 Pietro Honourable Late Rizzuto The
 The Late Honourable Pietro Rizzuto
 The Late Rizzuto Honourable Pietro
 The Pietro Honourable Late Rizzuto
 Honourable Late The Pietro Rizzuto
 Rizzuto Late Honourable Pietro The
 Late The Pietro Honourable Rizzuto
 Late Rizzuto The Pietro Honourable
 Rizzuto Honourable The Late Pietro
 Pietro Rizzuto The Late Honourable
 Pietro The Late Honourable Rizzuto
I wanted to suggest that perhaps criminals should apply for a warrant before they commit murder, but I do not want to pursue that because I am afraid that some Charter judge will give them a warrant or a licence to do so. 
Fifteen years ago, I would have been shocked at criticism of a decision rendered by the Supreme Court; but, today that is commonplace. 
When a major decision comes down from the Supreme Court, the media is there to interview people who wish to comment, mostly negatively, on the decision. 
As I stated, we would not have seen a headline like that 15 years ago.  
That is their function, and Parliament has referred it to them. 
However, the enactment of laws remains the function of Parliament. 
It is not the function of the Supreme Court of Canada or any other court to make laws.  
Honourable senators, I read in today's paper where the families of the Leslie Mahaffy and Kristen French, both of whom were killed by Paul Bernardo, are appealing to the judge to make a law prohibiting evidence of that type being heard by the public in court. 
The interesting point is that they are asking the judge to make the law; they are not asking Parliament. 
Parliament is the highest court in the land and that must always be so. 
It would be most unusual to have a lower court issue a directive to a higher court.  
Honourable senators, I commend Senator Cools for all the work and research she has done. 
Many aspects of her amendment are worthwhile considering. 
However, I feel she has omitted to take into consideration one aspect of our legislation.  
Any law passed by Parliament does not become law until it receives Royal Assent, and having the Supreme Court direct Parliament to pass a law by December 19, 1997 takes away the prerogative of the sovereign. 
That is why we have Royal Assent. 
We could have the ridiculous situation of one of the judges who ordered the enactment of this legislation by December 19 coming into this chamber and giving Royal Assent on behalf of the sovereign.  
Motion in Sub-Amendment 
Hon. Orville H. Phillips :
Therefore, I move: 
 Late Honourable Pietro Rizzuto
 Late Pietro Rizzuto The
 Late Rizzuto Pietro Honourable
 The Late Honourable Rizzuto
Tributes 
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
I never had any problem about residency.  
2. The Citizen said: "He said Senate staff told him he could keep his seat as long as he continues to own property in the Yukon."  
Senator Lucier replies: 
Again, I never spoke to the staff and was therefore never told any such comment. 
On my attendance, 21 % (19 out of 87 sittings), and on the statement: "He says - 
Senator Lucier has underlined the word "says."  
- he has bone cancer and must live in the British Columbia city for treatments".  
Senator Lucier replies: 
I wonder if Jack Aubry is questioning the fact that I have cancer. 
I would gladly give him permission to question my doctor as to whether I have had cancer for 10 years.  
4. I would like to have these points clarified but not in the media. 
I truly appreciate all the support I have received from my colleagues regarding this subject. 
Thanks to all of you.  
History of the Vote in Canada 
Book Launched by Governor General 
Hon. Mabel M. DeWare :
Honourable senators, yesterday, the Right Honourable Romeo LeBlanc, Governor General of Canada, launched an important new book, A History of the Vote in Canada , which recounts how the right to vote has evolved over the past 250 years. 
The book starts at the time of the first elected legislatures in what is now Canada and ends with the most recent federal election. 
It traces changes in voting eligibility, electioneering and voting practices, as well as voter turnout since Confederation. 
Extension of the vote to those who were excluded legally from the franchise, such as women, aboriginal people, religious and racial minorities, is examined in the social context of the period.  




Tributes on Retirement 
 on Retirement Tributes
 on Retirement Tributes
 Retirement Tributes on
 on Retirement Tributes
 Retirement on Tributes
 on Retirement Tributes
 on Tributes Retirement
 Retirement Tributes on
 Retirement Tributes on
 on Retirement Tributes
 Retirement Tributes on
 on Retirement Tributes
 Retirement on Tributes
 Tributes Retirement on
 Retirement on Tributes
 on Tributes Retirement
The Standing Senate Committee on Energy, the Environment and Natural Resources has the honour to present its 
SECOND REPORT 
Respectfully submitted, 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this bill be read the third time?  
On motion of Senator Butts, bill placed on the Orders of the Day for third reading at the next sitting of the Senate.  
Income Tax Conventions Implementation Act, 1997 
Report of Committee 
Hon. Michael Kirby , Chairman of the Standing Senate Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce, presented the following report: 
Tuesday, December 9, 1997 
The Standing Senate Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce has the honour to present its 
SIXTH REPORT 
Your Committee, to which was referred the Bill C-10, Act to implement a convention between Canada and Sweden, a convention between Canada and the Republic of Kazakhstan, a convention between Canada and the Republic of Iceland and a convention between Canada and the Kingdom of Denmark for the avoidance of double taxation and the prevention of fiscal evasion with respect to taxes on income and to amend the Canada-Netherlands Income Tax Convention Act, 1986 and the Canada-United States Tax Convention Act, 1984, has examined the said Bill in obedience to its Order of Reference dated December 8, 1997, and now reports the same without amendment.  
Respectfully submitted, 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this bill be read the third time?  
On motion of Senator Kirby, bill placed on the Orders of the Day for third reading at the next sitting of the Senate.  
Present State and Future of Agriculture 
Report of Agriculture and Forestry Committee Tabled 
Hon. Leonard J. Gustafson :
 on Retirement
 Retirement on
 Retirement Tributes
 on Tributes
THE HONOURABLE DORIS M. ANDERSON 
 THE . HONOURABLE ANDERSON DORIS M
 . HONOURABLE THE ANDERSON M DORIS
 DORIS HONOURABLE M . ANDERSON THE
 . THE ANDERSON M HONOURABLE DORIS
 HONOURABLE M . THE DORIS ANDERSON
 M ANDERSON THE . HONOURABLE DORIS
 DORIS ANDERSON . THE HONOURABLE M
 . THE ANDERSON DORIS M HONOURABLE
 DORIS . HONOURABLE THE ANDERSON M
 ANDERSON THE DORIS . HONOURABLE M
 ANDERSON HONOURABLE . DORIS M THE
 . THE M HONOURABLE DORIS ANDERSON
 THE HONOURABLE DORIS M ANDERSON .
 ANDERSON . HONOURABLE M DORIS THE
 HONOURABLE M ANDERSON DORIS . THE
 THE . M HONOURABLE ANDERSON DORIS
The government seems to assume that Canadians are irresponsible, ignorant, and improvident, and that big brother in Ottawa knows best.  
If he is so competent, what has this big brother been doing for 20 years? 
He agreed to give pension benefits to people, but forgot to levy what he needed to be able to do so, and what he levied, he loaned to the provinces at such low rates that, unless there are drastic changes, the plan will go bankrupt.  
Here we have a classic case of public mismanagement. 
On the one hand, they hand out goodies and, on the other, they forget to charge for them. 
And now they have learned nothing from this sad tale:
Ottawa is asking for even more from everyone and tells us that this time it will invest the money wisely and that it will be for the future good of all.  
Honourable senators, I would much more prefer looking after my own retirement, and I know many Canadians who would like to be free to do what they want with their own money.  
There are many other aspects of this bill that require serious consideration, but I will deal here with only one or two.  
The bill provides for the creation of a government agency responsible for investing the funds collected from contributors to the Canada Pension Plan.  
This agency will have more or less the same powers as the Caisse de dépôt du Québec. 
The management of these funds will therefore be given to a government monopoly, as was done with the generation and distribution of electricity.  
However, how can the performance of a monopoly be assessed? 
And do you know of any monopoly where unacceptable mismanagement did not occur at one time or another? 
There is a long list of unfortunate cases of poor management - we have all heard stories of the extravagant expense accounts of people in the public sector who think they own the jobs they are holding - of bad investments, such as those made in real estate by an agency like the one we are creating, for example, of consumer gouging - we have seen monopolies charge excessive rates, because they were the only ones providing the service - of unreasonable benefits, such as complete job security for employees at the expense of the taxpayer - as has occurred in crown corporations you are familiar with - of differences in economic and social objectives - this also happened when an agency was created and given a mandate, and then after 15 years, it started doing something else, we have all seen this - of conflicts of interest involving officials who make no difference between their personal interest and that of the public, et cetera.  
There is a long list of horror stories involving monopolies. 
The whole history of the public sector, here and elsewhere, is full of such unfortunate incidents. 
I will not speak here about what occurred in Eastern Europe or in the Communist Bloc. 
But in this country and in countries like France and England, such cases have been a constant feature of the past 15 or 20 years.  
You may tell me that such things also happen in the private sector. 
 THE HONOURABLE DORIS M ANDERSON
 THE DORIS ANDERSON . HONOURABLE
 ANDERSON THE . DORIS M
 HONOURABLE M DORIS THE ANDERSON
Tributes on Retirement 
 Tributes Retirement on
 Tributes Retirement on
 Tributes on Retirement
 on Tributes Retirement
 on Retirement Tributes
 Tributes Retirement on
 Tributes on Retirement
 Tributes on Retirement
 on Tributes Retirement
 Retirement on Tributes
 on Tributes Retirement
 Tributes on Retirement
 Tributes on Retirement
 Tributes on Retirement
 on Retirement Tributes
 Tributes Retirement on
This has to be invested right away, it cannot wait until the afternoon.  
Do you think that the heavy machinery required for these operations will be efficient? 
Impossible, honourable senators. 
There will be lost efficiency, which means financial losses. 
Those who believe that "big brother" will be kinder than the community of specialists in the private sector are seriously wrong.  
Even for the private sector specializing in this type of operations, whether mutual funds, national brokerages, or trusts, when the volume exceeds $50 or $60 million, the performance ratio is not proportional to the volume of the funds being managed.  
Private enterprise is aware of that. 
It seems only the government is not.  
The huge monopoly to be created presents a very high risk of inefficiency, of bad investments, and therefore of poor performance. 
Why should everyone be obliged to contribute, to provide funds to a manager who may do a worse job than the person who actually owns those funds?  
If some are deemed to have not done a good job, they are replaced, something is done about it.  
We are familiar with the virtues of competition in the private sector, which results in a raised level of performance. 
That is good for the consumer, so why would it not be applicable to this particular type of services?  
Analysis of investments, or the decision as to the choice of investment for a business, is a highly technical undertaking, but also a risky one. 
This is why, in all wisdom, we must not "put all our eggs in one basket," as the old saying goes. 
Ought we not to have a number of baskets instead, so that any one bad decision will not be a huge disaster?  
This diversification of investments is wise; ought it not to be institutionalized in the law, and ought not the number of independent responsibility centres for investments to be increased?  
My third point concerns the relationship between the government, the Minister of Finance in particular, and the agency in question. 
It will always be tempting to use these funds to finance governments, at lower rates than if it had been invested in the open market. 
That is, in fact, what has been done since 1996 under the present system. 
 on Retirement
 Tributes on
 on Tributes
 on Retirement
The Honourable Joseph P. Landry 
 Joseph . Landry P Honourable The
 Joseph P Landry Honourable . The
 Joseph . P Honourable Landry The
 Honourable Landry Joseph . P The
 The Joseph Honourable Landry P .
 P Landry . The Joseph Honourable
 . The P Honourable Landry Joseph
 The P Honourable . Joseph Landry
 Honourable The P Landry Joseph .
 The P . Joseph Landry Honourable
 Joseph Honourable . Landry The P
 . Landry Honourable The Joseph P
 Joseph The . Honourable P Landry
 Landry The Joseph P . Honourable
 Landry . P Joseph The Honourable
 . P Joseph Landry The Honourable
Senator Nolin :
The Prime Minister has said he was prepared to negotiate. 
The Leader of the Government in the Senate has said the government is not prepared to negotiate.  
This morning, the Quebec minister of intergovernmental affairs, Mr. Brassard, said, and I quote: 
This is what we have always said.  
Bear in mind that this minister is a separatist. 
I repeat what he said: 
This is what we have always said.  
Mr. Chrétien has acknowledged that the federal government would negotiate. 
Could the Leader of the Government in the Senate tell us under what authority the Prime Minister could negotiate?  
Senator Graham :
The Prime Minister would be negotiating on behalf of Canadians, but recognizing at the same time that nine other provinces and the territories are involved. 
I am sure the Prime Minister would take all of that into consideration.  
Senator Nolin :
The Supreme Court received the request from your government to decide on the issue of Quebec's secession. 
We will learn in all likelihood from the Supreme Court that the amending formula would be appropriate if Canadians agreed to allow one province to separate from the others. 
Have the Prime Minister, the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs or officials of your government had formal or informal discussions on this matter with the representatives of the nine other provinces?  
Senator Graham :
Not that I am aware, honourable senators. 
We are aware, of course, of the meetings that took place with the premiers in Calgary. 
 Honourable Joseph P . Landry
 P Honourable Landry The Joseph
 P . Honourable The Landry
 Joseph . Honourable P Landry
Tributes on Retirement 
 on Tributes Retirement
 Retirement Tributes on
 on Tributes Retirement
 on Tributes Retirement
 Retirement on Tributes
 on Tributes Retirement
 on Retirement Tributes
 Tributes on Retirement
 Retirement on Tributes
 Retirement on Tributes
 on Tributes Retirement
 on Retirement Tributes
 Tributes on Retirement
 Tributes Retirement on
 Retirement on Tributes
 Retirement on Tributes
We heard direct evidence from 68 groups composed of over 100 individual witnesses. 
Notwithstanding the short time-frames allotted in our terms of reference and as referenced by Senator Lynch-Staunton, the committee clearly heard every viewpoint that people wished to express.  
I hear Senator Wood. 
I will deal with her concerns in a moment.  
While some individual groups did not give evidence, as pointed out by Senator Wood, I concluded that, having examined the materials from those groups, that their viewpoint was indeed expressed by others during the course of those hearings. 
I believe no viewpoint was excluded from our deliberations.  
The time frames in the hearings in no way diminished the committee's ability to obtain or weigh the evidence. 
The committee made a thorough investigation of that evidence. 
No point of view went unexamined, save for one raised by the Reform Party at the last minute, and I will deal with that later.  
Let me for a moment repeat what we heard. 
There was a unanimous resolution, save for two abstentions, from the Quebec assembly. 
We heard from the opposition in the assembly; the Quebec government itself; English and French school boards; Catholic, Protestant and other teachers' groups; archbishops of the Roman Catholic church and the Anglican archbishop of Quebec, which I will deal with later; minority groups including Jewish, Arab, non-Roman Catholic and other allophone groups; students groups, both English and French. 
All agreed that linguistic school boards, which were a direct consequence of this amendment, were desirable and progressive.  
There was some dissent. 
I will briefly touch on it, as did Senator Bolduc in his most insightful speech, especially with respect to the plight of certain French-speaking Protestants and certain English-speaking Catholics. 
There is no question at all that some in those groups feel detrimentally affected.  
Again, under the current Quebec law 109, the notwithstanding clauses had been included, both with respect to the Quebec Charter and the federal Charter of Rights and Freedoms, therefore allowing for denominational teaching to be continued in Quebec. 
How the Quebec government will ultimately continue to afford opportunities for denominational teaching is a much more difficult question to predict. 
However, it is clear to me, from all the evidence I heard and carefully cross-examined, that the majorities of the so-called minorities favoured this change. 
There appeared to be some exceptions at the outset that must be addressed.  
 Tributes on
 Tributes Retirement
 Retirement Tributes
 Retirement Tributes
The Senate 
 Senate The
 Senate The
 Senate The
 Senate The
 The Senate
 Senate The
 The Senate
 Senate The
 Senate The
 The Senate
 The Senate
 Senate The
 Senate The
 Senate The
 The Senate
 Senate The
Demolition of Government Laboratories-Possibility of Restoration of Funding-Government Position 
Answers to Order Paper Questions Tabled 
Energy-Department of the Environment-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Energy-Department of Justice-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Energy-Department of Multiculturalism-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Energy-Department of Natural Resources-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Defence-Status of Clothe the Soldier Project 
Defence-Status of the Armoured Personnel Carrier Replacement Program 
Business of the Senate 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
Second Reading-Debate Continued 
Canada Cooperatives Bill 
First Reading 
Criminal Code 
Interpretation Act 
Bill to Amend-Second Reading-Motions in Amendment-Debate Adjourned to Await Ruling of Speaker 
Motion in Sub-Amendment 
Quebec 
Linguistic School Boards-Amendment to Section 93 of Constitution-Report of Special Joint Committee Adopted 
Quebec 
 Senate
 Senate
 Senate
 Senate
Tributes on Appointment and Retirement of Officers 
 Appointment of Retirement and Officers on Tributes
 of Appointment Retirement and Tributes Officers on
 of on Officers Retirement Appointment and Tributes
 Tributes of Retirement on Officers Appointment and
 on and Retirement of Tributes Appointment Officers
 Officers and on of Tributes Retirement Appointment
 on Officers Tributes of Retirement Appointment and
 Retirement Appointment Tributes and Officers on of
 Retirement Officers Appointment Tributes and of on
 Appointment Officers and on Tributes Retirement of
 on of Retirement and Tributes Officers Appointment
 of on Tributes Appointment and Officers Retirement
 and Officers of Appointment on Retirement Tributes
 Retirement Tributes on and Appointment Officers of
 and Tributes Officers Retirement Appointment on of
 Tributes Officers Appointment and of on Retirement
However, why should we in the Senate allow any province to proceed in a way that we consider unlawful? 
If there is an amendment to the Constitution, each senator in his or her heart and mind, after reviewing the testimony, must come to a conclusion. 
He or she can either vote for, against or abstain from the vote on the resolution.  
They want to be under the law, as does the Province of Newfoundland. 
They want to be under the Constitution. 
If they meet the standards of a constitutional change, I, for one, will support them, notwithstanding the fact that I mistrust their motivation and mistrust what they say. 
However, on matter of dealing with the rule of law, I am bound by the rule of law.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
My question has nothing to do with that answer. 
It was renewed in 1982 and given protection from the Charter. 
Quebec has finally adopted a linguistic school system that looks very promising and can be implemented without section 93 being amended, unlike Newfoundland, which needs an amendment to Term 17 to be able to implement a non-denominational system. 
The two resolutions are completely different in content and intent.  
Again, my question relates to the fact that the new linguistic school board process is well under way. 
There will be elections to the boards in June. 
What impact does the modification of section 93 or the non-modification of section 93 have on what is already under way?  
Senator Grafstein :
Again, honourable senators, there are two solitudes here. 
I believe that education, in pith and substance, is a provincial matter.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
That is not the question.  
 Tributes on Appointment and of Officers
 Officers Appointment and Tributes of Retirement
 of Appointment on Officers and Retirement
 and Retirement of Tributes on Appointment
New Senators 
 Senators New
 Senators New
 Senators New
 Senators New
 Senators New
 Senators New
 New Senators
 Senators New
 New Senators
 New Senators
 Senators New
 New Senators
 New Senators
 Senators New
 New Senators
 New Senators
Perhaps honourable senators opposite do not want to hear what Paul Martin will be doing, and the explaining that you will have to do back home in 10 or 15 years when your children ask you what you did about this bill. 
When they retire, their CPP benefits will be worth about what they put in, plus 2.5 per cent.  
I do not get it. 
I do not understand why we are being asked to do that to our children, so that those who are retiring today can receive full benefits and those who are retiring soon can get their benefits. 
I do not get it. 
I will try to explain it today, and - I hope I can convince you.  
The CPP is part of a larger program that Paul Martin is introducing. 
Everything involves reform. 
We will have a reform of the Old Age Security benefit, which is coming up after Christmas. 
It is important to get through this before Christmas so that we can consider changes in the cut-backs that will come due after Christmas. 
We on this side think that both matters should be discussed together because it is part of a pension program and a part of a social security net for people in this country who retire at 65 and who want to retire with some dignity.  
We strongly believe that this measure is a payroll tax and a job killer. 
Yesterday, Senator Kirby said it was not a payroll tax. 
The Department of Finance did a study in April 1995 which was reported in The Toronto Star . 
The study noted that the relatively modest increase of CPP premiums between 1986 and 1993 resulted in 26,000 fewer jobs. 
It further noted that the increases have had and will continue to have a negative impact on the labour force. 
That contradicts the government's arguments that CPP premiums are not a payroll tax but, rather, a pension contribution. 
In their own report, the Department of Finance stated that employers' contributions to CPP and the Quebec Pension Plan are part of the compulsory payroll tax. 
The department warned against higher payroll taxes in that same report and called this tax just that, namely, a payroll tax.  
We on this side strongly believe there are a number of important issues contained in this bill that we should discuss before it is passed. 
 Senators
 New
 Senators
 Senators
Congratulations on Appointment 
 on Appointment Congratulations
 Appointment on Congratulations
 on Appointment Congratulations
 on Congratulations Appointment
 Appointment on Congratulations
 Congratulations Appointment on
 Congratulations Appointment on
 Appointment Congratulations on
 Congratulations Appointment on
 on Appointment Congratulations
 Congratulations Appointment on
 Appointment on Congratulations
 Appointment on Congratulations
 Congratulations on Appointment
 Congratulations on Appointment
 Congratulations on Appointment
They were, as were most people, in favour of linguistic boards, but when it came to the abrogation of section 93, not only were they not in accord with that when they appeared before our committee, they even wrote to us to reconfirm their disagreement with the abrogation of section 93. 
However, Senator Grafstein has said that both the French-speaking Protestants and the English-speaking Catholics were certainly not in agreement, although they were in agreement with linguistic boards.  
It is not only the minority of the majority, in terms of the French-speaking Protestants, but also Alliance Québec that was in disagreement with this.  
I should like to raise many other points but, in view of the time, I will stop there.  
Senator Grafstein :
Honourable senators, I would refer my colleague to the transcript. 
Read the transcript. 
If there is a dispute about evidence, rather than taking my word or that of the honourable senator opposite - with whom I do disagree - senators should read the transcript. 
The transcript will speak for itself.  
Senator Lavoie-Roux :
I think all senators would have wanted to read the transcript, but we did not have enough time.  
The minister appeared before the committee on November 4. I asked him if he felt that minorities would be as well protected by section 23 of the Charter as they were by section 93 of the Constitution, and he said that they would not be as well protected.  
Senator Grafstein :
He and I have a different viewpoint on section 23(1)( a ) of the Charter.  
Hon. Dalia Wood :
Honourable senators, I have a question for the honourable senator.  
I do not agree with the concept of my honourable friend's consensus. 
Le Fédération des comités des parents de la province de Québec is a group mandated by the National Assembly to represent all parents and all schools in Quebec. 
They appeared before the committee. 
The president, Mr. Gary Stronach, when asked if the membership was aware, stated - and this is in his letter - that he did not ask his membership for their views. 
 Congratulations Appointment
 Appointment Congratulations
 Appointment Congratulations
 Appointment Congratulations
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 PROCEEDINGS ROUTINE
 PROCEEDINGS ROUTINE
 ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS
 ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS
 ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS
 ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS
 ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS
 ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS
 ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS
 PROCEEDINGS ROUTINE
 PROCEEDINGS ROUTINE
 PROCEEDINGS ROUTINE
 PROCEEDINGS ROUTINE
 ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS
 ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS
 PROCEEDINGS ROUTINE
In the current discussions in Kyoto, the idea of tailoring reductions targets to individual countries' economic and social profiles rather than having a one-size-fits-all commitment has gained some currency, particularly in view of the most recent American proposal. 
Where does the Canadian delegation stand with respect to this concept?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government):
Honourable senators, the media is reporting, of course, on a possible deal on targets and time-tables which could see Canada accepting a reduction of 5 per cent from 1990 levels bythe year 2010. 
At this point, these reports are speculative, but negotiations are ongoing.  
National Unity 
Recent Remarks of Prime Minister-Possible Conditions of Secession of Quebec-Government Position 
Hon. Pierre Claude Nolin :
Honourable senators, I would like to return to the matter of the Prime Minister's statement last weekend on Quebec's secession. 
He said in fact last week in Quebec City that he would be prepared to negotiate Quebec's separation, if certain conditions were met.  
I would first like to know what conditions the Prime Minister was referring to?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, the Government of Canada has always said that Quebecers would not be kept within Canada against their will. 
That being said, breaking up a country is not a step that one would take lightly. 
Senator Graham :
The will of Quebecers to leave must be clearly expressed. 
In addition, of course, any process that would lead to secession must respect the law.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
What does the law say on secession?  
Senator Graham :
 ROUTINE
 ROUTINE
 ROUTINE
 ROUTINE
Information Commissioner 
 Commissioner Information
 Commissioner Information
 Information Commissioner
 Information Commissioner
 Information Commissioner
 Information Commissioner
 Information Commissioner
 Information Commissioner
 Information Commissioner
 Commissioner Information
 Information Commissioner
 Commissioner Information
 Commissioner Information
 Information Commissioner
 Commissioner Information
 Commissioner Information
Their view was that they represented the broad consensus of parents and students as it applied to this amendment. 
All parents wanted a change to renovate the school system, and this was the best modality in which to do that.  
I agree with Senator Lynch-Staunton, Senator Wood and Senator Lavoie-Roux that this is not perfect. 
However, in addition to the evidence, we did refer to opinion polls that seemed to suggest a strong support for reform along these lines.  
Yes, the resolution is imperfect. 
We would like to have done it "our way," as Frank Sinatra used to say, but we must deal with the Province of Quebec in this case. 
We had to bend imperfect tools to see whether they fit our minimum requirements. 
In my view, they did not fit our minimum requirements; they fit our reasonable requirements for constitutional amendment.  
Senator Wood :
Is it not true in the letter from the bishops of Quebec - the letter the honourable senator read - that they were in favour of repealing section 93? 
They questioned linguistic rights and suggested that denominational guarantees established by 107 be maintained. 
There was a caveat there that my honourable friend forgot to read.  
Senator Grafstein :
I find myself in great difficulty defending Roman Catholic theology let alone letters from Roman Catholic archbishops. 
I will leave it to each senator to come to his or her own conclusion on the testimony and on the letters, which are appended to the report.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Honourable senators, Senator Grafstein is quite right in stating that reform is needed. 
Actually, reform is well under way in Quebec. 
The new system, it seems, will be in place for the next school year. 
New linguistic boards will be set up. 
 Information
 Commissioner
 Information
 Information
Annual Report Tabled 
 Tabled Annual Report
 Annual Report Tabled
 Annual Tabled Report
 Tabled Annual Report
 Report Tabled Annual
 Tabled Report Annual
 Annual Report Tabled
 Tabled Annual Report
 Report Annual Tabled
 Report Annual Tabled
 Report Tabled Annual
 Annual Tabled Report
 Annual Report Tabled
 Report Tabled Annual
 Report Annual Tabled
 Annual Tabled Report
As a result, Wednesday has become a normal working session, going on until five or six o'clock. 
The whole purpose of starting the session at 1:30 p.m. has been defeated.  
I do not think it is correct, unless there is an urgency, for committees to sit at the same time as the chamber. 
This is not for appearances' sake, but because the work done here can often be as important in the debates as what goes on in committees. 
At various stages of our work - the introduction of bills, second reading, committee referral, then third reading - we are often doing several at the same time. 
Sometimes even two, three or four committees are sitting when we are sitting. 
That is an improper practice.  
If the deputy leader could guarantee to us that, on Wednesdays from now on - and we will strive to be cooperative - we will sit no later than 3:30 p.m., unless there is a proven urgency, then I think Senator Stewart's motion is in order. 
However, we need that assurance first.  
Senator Carstairs :
Let me assure the Leader and Deputy Leader of the Opposition that we will do everything on our part to ensure that sessions end on time. 
We did sit yesterday, which was a Monday. 
I can assure senators we will be sitting next Monday in order to fulfil the business of the chamber before the Christmas break.  
Senator Kinsella :
On that basis, I do not think leave is necessary.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is leave granted?  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
He just felt it was not necessary.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
 Report Tabled
 Tabled Report
 Report Annual
 Report Tabled
Canadian Transportation Accident Investigation and Safety Board Act 
 Act Accident Safety Board Transportation Investigation Canadian and
 Accident Board Act Investigation Safety Transportation and Canadian
 and Accident Investigation Transportation Board Safety Act Canadian
 and Safety Transportation Accident Investigation Act Canadian Board
 Transportation Act Investigation Board Accident Safety and Canadian
 Board Transportation Act and Accident Canadian Safety Investigation
 Transportation Act Safety Board Accident Canadian and Investigation
 Act Transportation Board Canadian Investigation Accident Safety and
 Accident Safety Board Act Transportation Canadian Investigation and
 Investigation Safety and Canadian Board Accident Transportation Act
 Accident Safety Canadian Investigation Board Transportation Act and
 Board Canadian and Safety Transportation Act Investigation Accident
 Transportation Safety Accident Investigation Canadian and Board Act
 Transportation Safety and Investigation Canadian Board Act Accident
 Transportation and Accident Board Investigation Canadian Safety Act
 Act and Accident Transportation Safety Canadian Board Investigation
Honourable senators, before I call for Senators' Statements, I should like to introduce the two pages who are with us this week through the exchange program with the House of Commons.  
They are Anne McCulluch of Calgary, Alberta, who is pursuing studies in journalism at Carleton University.  
Kirk Nangreaves of Saint-Hubert, Quebec, is studying at the University of Ottawa Arts Faculty.  
He is majoring in psychology.  
On behalf of all senators and the Senate, I bid you welcome.  
SENATORS' STATEMENTS 
The Senate 
Response to Newspaper Article on Senator's Residency Qualifications 
Hon. Colin Kenny :
Honourable senators, I rise today on behalf of a colleague who cannot be present, Senator Paul Lucier. 
Senator Lucier has sent me a fax which he has asked me to communicate to the chamber. 
For your benefit, he wants me to reply to the comments made about him in the media recently.  
He writes: 
I would like to make some points with respect to this matter: 
The Citizen said: "Paul Lucier said the Senate's legal staff approved his change in residency five years ago when he moved to Vancouver."  
Senator Lucier says: 
This is not true. 
I never spoke with legal staff five years ago about this. 
I never had any problem about residency.  
2. The Citizen said: "He said Senate staff told him he could keep his seat as long as he continues to own property in the Yukon."  
 Canadian Transportation Accident Investigation and Safety Act
 Transportation Safety Accident Act Board Investigation and
 Safety Canadian Accident Transportation and Board Investigation
 Act Board Investigation and Transportation Canadian Accident
Bill to Amend-First Reading 
 Reading to - Bill First Amend
 - Reading Amend First to Bill
 Bill - First Reading to Amend
 Reading Bill Amend to - First
 - Bill Reading Amend to First
 - to Reading Bill Amend First
 First to Amend Reading Bill -
 Bill to Amend First Reading -
 - Bill Amend to First Reading
 First Amend Reading - to Bill
 Bill to First Reading Amend -
 to Reading Bill - Amend First
 Bill First Amend Reading to -
 Reading - First Bill to Amend
 First - Reading to Amend Bill
 to Reading Amend First - Bill
We said so in the report.  
This left two groups, small but important, who claim to be detrimentally affected. 
It was not clear that the entirety of these two groups were objecting. 
These are the two groups to which Senator Bolduc referred.  
There were certain spokespersons representing these groups. 
They were French-speaking Protestants and a smaller group of English-speaking Roman Catholics. 
The Catholics were represented by English-speaking priests.  
Again, in Senator Bolduc's thoughtful speech, he refers to these groups. 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, I regret to interrupt once again. 
The clock now says six o'clock.  
Senator Carstairs :
There is agreement that we will not see the clock, Your Honour.  
Senator Grafstein :
It is not clear to me whether these witnesses represented the entire spectrum of the groups for whom they spoke. 
Having said that, their rights are of concern.  
However, it is clear that denominational teaching will continue inside the province of Quebec by Quebec law.  
It is difficult to see how their accessibility to denominational teaching in the public school system will be abrogated in the short run. 
Obviously, it is no small solace, unlike the case for many years in the province of Ontario, that minority denominational rights, religious education, was achieved, in part, through public funding in the province of Quebec. In other words, as Senator Lavoie-Roux pointed out, in the province of Ontario there is and was no public funding of other religious or denominational schools, unlike Ontario. 
I want to make specific reference to this point because I have some personal experience in this regard. 
 Bill to Amend - First
 - Reading Bill Amend to
 Amend to First - Reading
 Reading Bill First to -
Pension Benefits Standards Act, 1985 Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions Act 
 the Superintendent Office Standards Pension of Financial of Act 1985 Institutions Act , Benefits
 Standards Superintendent the Act , Act of Pension of Office 1985 Institutions Benefits Financial
 of Act Benefits Financial Pension the 1985 Standards of Office , Institutions Superintendent Act
 , Standards the Pension of of 1985 Benefits Act Institutions Act Superintendent Office Financial
 of Benefits 1985 of the Financial Standards , Act Pension Institutions Act Superintendent Office
 Office the Benefits Standards Act Pension Superintendent 1985 , Financial of Act Institutions of
 Office Institutions Pension Act the of , Financial Superintendent Standards of Benefits Act 1985
 of Act of Pension Superintendent Standards 1985 Financial Office Act the , Benefits Institutions
 Act Institutions Superintendent Pension Office 1985 the Benefits , of Financial Standards Act of
 Pension Standards of Superintendent the Institutions Act 1985 Benefits Office Act , of Financial
 Institutions Superintendent Act Benefits of of Pension , Act Office the Financial Standards 1985
 the Office , Act Financial Standards Superintendent Act of 1985 of Institutions Pension Benefits
 Office Act Superintendent Pension of Institutions Act Financial Standards of , the Benefits 1985
 Institutions Act the Act Standards Financial 1985 , of Office of Superintendent Benefits Pension
 of , Standards Financial Institutions Office of Pension Act Superintendent the 1985 Benefits Act
 1985 Act , Standards Act Pension Superintendent Office Institutions of Financial Benefits of the
This means that there would be at least four mandatory and separate school boards, including two with three mandatory sectors each and two others with two mandatory sectors each. 
As the witness said, there would be a superimposition of organizational structures. 
The same thing would happen in Quebec City. 
This would create unnecessary costs and complications in the annual registration of students, the assignment of personnel, the distribution of resources and the establishment of voters' lists.  
Some of the witnesses who appeared before the special joint committee seem to think that the debate on education that has been going on for over 30 years in Quebec is not only about freeing the Government of Quebec of the restrictions resulting from paragraphs (1) to (4) of section 93. 
But even if that were the case, in the five extensive public consultations carried out over the past five years, the reform of public education in Quebec was the major issue - and it is the organizational structures guaranteed by section 93 which obviously are impeding this reform. 
This very public debate necessarily raised the question of whether the Constitution should be amended to solve this problem.  
After hearing the witnesses, the committee was satisfied that a majority of Catholic and Protestant parents - the two groups concerned - supported the amendment to section 93.  
One aspect of the issue that was frequently mentioned is the Quebec National Assembly's unanimous support of Bill 109 and the amendment to section 93. 
Such unanimous votes are significant, but they do not mean there is a consensus in the Catholic and Protestant communities, whose privileges are at stake. 
Such unanimity in the Quebec National Assembly proves nevertheless that support for the amendment transcends party lines. 
The PQ government was reluctant to propose that amendment, because it involved using the amending formula provided for in the Constitution Act of 1982, which that government refuses to recognize. 
The government finally yielded to the pressures from Liberal opposition members.  
Some people were concerned that the debate on national unity might detract from the substance of the amendment. 
If the only concern of the special joint committee had been to prove that "federalism works," it would not have insisted on hearing this evidence showing that there was a consensus among Catholic and Protestant parents. 
From the very beginning, the Government of Quebec assured this Parliament that there was an appropriate consensus in favour of the amendment in that province. 
However, the committee insisted on assessing and challenging these statements - so much so that the Quebec ministers responsible for education and for intergovernmental affairs eventually appeared before the committee, along with the official opposition critics on these matters. 
Clearly, what was - and still is - at issue is the legitimacy of the amendment.  
It was mentioned repeatedly that, as a result of the Supreme Court decisions, it has become obvious that the rights that are positively guaranteed under section 93 are not as broad as they were originally assumed to be. 
However, we do not believe that the amendment was justified because the denominational education rights guaranteed under section 93 were nothing more than empty shells. 
 Pension Benefits Standards Act , 1985 Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions
 Benefits Act Standards Institutions of Financial Pension Superintendent Office Act of , 1985
 1985 Institutions Pension of Financial the of Act Benefits Superintendent Office , Act
 Pension Act 1985 Office Financial Benefits , Standards of Institutions Superintendent the of
Bill to Amend-First Reading 
 Bill Amend Reading First - to
 First to Reading Amend - Bill
 to Reading - First Amend Bill
 - Bill First Reading Amend to
 Amend to First Reading - Bill
 First Amend - Bill Reading to
 Reading to - Amend Bill First
 Reading Bill to Amend First -
 - to First Amend Reading Bill
 Reading Amend First - Bill to
 - Bill Amend First Reading to
 - Reading Bill Amend First to
 First to Bill Amend - Reading
 Amend Bill Reading First to -
 First Reading - to Amend Bill
 Amend Reading to Bill - First
Leave is granted.  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is it your pleasure, honourable senators, to adopt the motion?  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
Motion agreed to.  
The Senate 
Conduct of Business-Notice of Inquiry 
Hon. William M. Kelly :
Honourable senators, I give notice: 
That on Thursday next, December 11, 1997, I will call the attention of the Senate to the way in which the Senate conducts its business.  
QUESTION PERIOD 
Federal-Provincial Relations 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Province of Quebec-Request for Particulars 
Hon. Fernand Roberge :
Honourable senators, my question follows the announcement made yesterday regarding the government's decision to set at $12.5 billion the cash floor for transfer payments made under the Canada health and social transfer (CHST). 
The government would have us believe that this amount represents an increase in health care payments. 
However, the figures indicate otherwise.  
 Bill to Amend - Reading
 Bill to First - Reading
 Bill Reading to - Amend
 Bill Amend First Reading to
National Defence 
 National Defence
 Defence National
 Defence National
 Defence National
 Defence National
 National Defence
 National Defence
 Defence National
 National Defence
 Defence National
 Defence National
 National Defence
 National Defence
 Defence National
 National Defence
 Defence National
Section 43 of the 1982 Constitution contains bilateral amendment processes between the federal government and provinces where their interests are solely engaged. 
Clearly, the only highway, the only path the Government of Quebec or the assembly of Quebec could take to achieve its objective was via the 1982 Constitution.  
Honourable senators, I then examined the federal resolution, which is the one we are being asked to consider. 
The federal resolution differs substantially from the Quebec resolutions. 
They are both appended to the report for your consideration.  
The federal resolution made reference not only to the 1982 Constitution, but to section 23 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedom incorporated in the Constitution Act, 1982.  
I concluded, after listening carefully to legal advice proffered before the committee, that the operative clause of any constitutional resolution was the wording of the amending clause itself. 
While recitals are of interest, while they are opinionated, while they are descriptive, they are not binding.  
Again, it was clear to me that the only way that the federal government could accede to the Quebec assembly's request was by utilizing the 1982 Constitution. 
The Government of Quebec knew this. 
We in Parliament knew this. 
Hence, I and others on the committee insisted that Quebec representatives be invited, despite reports we read in the press to the contrary, that the Quebec representatives would not attend at Ottawa.  
Finally, representatives of the Government of Quebec were invited to attend, which they did, together with members of the opposition. 
They appeared before the committee so that this point and other questions could be addressed.  
Members of the committee were pleased when the Minister of Education, Madame Marois, and the Minister of Federal-Provincial Affairs, Mr. Brassard, accepted our invitation to appear.  
Minister Brassard repeated the well-worn, often-repeated, proposition that no Quebec government will feel bound to recognize the 1982 Constitution. 
Minister Brassard then acknowledged, almost in the same breath, that under the law of the land, under the Supreme Court of Canada, the Province of Quebec was indeed bound by the Constitution Act, 1982. 
This is now clear and unequivocal.  
Clearly and fairly, the Province of Quebec deems itself bound by the 1982 Constitution. 
On the testimony received and based on my personal review, I concluded that the federal government indeed had the power under the 1982 Constitution, section 43, to accede to Quebec's request.  
 Defence
 National
 National
 Defence
Notice of Motion to Establish Special Committee to Examine Activities of Canadian Airborne Regiment in Somalia 
 Airborne Canadian to in Establish Special Activities of to of Examine Regiment Motion Committee Notice Somalia
 Special of Activities of Canadian Airborne Regiment Motion in Notice to Committee to Establish Somalia Examine
 to Committee Notice Examine Establish Canadian Airborne to Activities of Special Regiment Somalia in Motion of
 Special Somalia Examine in Airborne Establish to Notice Motion Activities Committee Canadian Regiment to of of
 in of Motion Airborne to to Regiment Somalia Committee Special Canadian of Notice Activities Establish Examine
 Airborne Examine Regiment Canadian Motion Notice of of to Activities Somalia Special Committee Establish in to
 of Committee Activities to Examine Canadian in of Motion Establish to Regiment Notice Somalia Special Airborne
 Establish Committee Canadian Activities Airborne to in Notice Somalia Special Motion of Regiment to of Examine
 Special Motion in Establish Canadian to Airborne to Somalia Activities of Committee Regiment of Examine Notice
 Activities Canadian Special Motion of Airborne in Somalia to Regiment Establish Notice to of Examine Committee
 Notice in to Committee Airborne Regiment Special of Examine Establish Motion Canadian Somalia of to Activities
 to Examine of of Activities Somalia Special Motion Establish Notice Regiment Canadian to in Committee Airborne
 Airborne Activities Somalia to Motion Committee Establish Regiment to of of Special Canadian Examine in Notice
 to Establish to Notice Examine Airborne Somalia Regiment Committee Special Motion Canadian of in Activities of
 Committee Airborne Canadian to Regiment Special in to of Somalia Examine of Establish Motion Notice Activities
 Canadian Notice Motion to Special Regiment of Somalia Committee to Airborne Activities Examine Establish in of
He is as well placed as anyone to reply to concerns expressed here and elsewhere. 
I would expect that he would welcome the opportunity to do so before a vote is taken.  
I feel strongly that the minister must share his views with this house and engage in an open and frank exchange directly with its members. 
I urge the leadership on the other side to arrange such a meeting at the earliest opportunity.  
There are still too many unanswered questions and disturbing uncertainties for many senators on both sides of this house to state a firm position at this time. 
The minister should be able to provide assurance, the lack of which so far has caused many of us here to remain hesitant to support this resolution, myself included.  
Hon. Jerahmiel S. Grafstein :
Honourable senators, education is everyone's business. 
When citizens debate their children's education, sometimes passion overwhelms reason.  
It was with some trepidation that I entered the thicket of the Quebec school question, coming as I do from the province of Ontario. 
The dense history of the Quebec school question holds lessons for us all.  
Once appointed to the committee, I set about to better understand the tangled roots of history lying beneath this question, to digest as best I could the numerous articles, studies and especially reports commissioned by successive Quebec governments over the last few years ranging from the articulate Parent commission to the Kenniff report to the findings of the Estates General. 
It became evident to me that a deep and thorough consensus had developed for radical reformation, at least among the elites of Quebec. 
Claude Ryan, an old friend of mine and the then Minister of Education, had galvanized that reform process over a decade ago in Quebec. 
It was equally clear to me that the existing school structures were in desperate need of renovation, particularly in light of the overlapping school structures in Quebec and the financial restraints facing all governments.  
Rather than an historic essay, perhaps it would be simpler if I could share with you my thought processes and the evidence I found as a member of the Standing Senate Committee on the Quebec Resolution Requesting Constitutional Change.  
First, a brief word about committees and their work. 
There are, as all senators know, three committee structures in Parliament: the committees of the other place, our Senate committees - both special and standing - and the special joint and standing committees of the Senate and the House of Commons. 
I prefer Senate committees.  
Senate committees are less partisan, more thorough and more careful. 
 Notice of to Establish Special Committee to Examine Activities of Canadian Airborne Regiment in Somalia
 Airborne of Canadian to Motion Special Activities in Examine Committee Regiment Establish to Notice of
 Establish Somalia Activities of to of Regiment Motion to in Notice Special Canadian Committee Examine
 Activities of Notice Committee Establish Motion Airborne Special to in Regiment of to Canadian Somalia
Debates of the Senate (Hansard) 
 Debates the Senate ( of Hansard )
 the Senate ) Hansard of Debates (
 Debates ( the Hansard ) of Senate
 of the Hansard ( Senate Debates )
 ) Debates the Senate Hansard of (
 of the ( Debates ) Hansard Senate
 Hansard Senate ) Debates ( the of
 ( Debates of the ) Hansard Senate
 ( Hansard Senate of ) Debates the
 the ( of Debates ) Hansard Senate
 Hansard Senate ( of Debates the )
 the Hansard ) ( Senate Debates of
 Debates Hansard Senate ( of the )
 ) Hansard of the ( Senate Debates
 Senate the ) ( Debates Hansard of
 Senate the Debates Hansard ) ( of
This bill has important consequences for many of us, and more particularly, for our children and our grandchildren. 
Those people who are already retired and at the age of 65 will receive all their benefits. 
For those people who are in the middle and who will soon be retiring, it is not a big problem for them. 
They will have some reduced benefits and some increased costs. 
To those people who have been paying all their lives - that is, all the baby boomers who will begin to turn 50 - they will receive benefits and be faced with another 15 years of increased costs.  
I will tell you for whom this is important. 
I have a daughter who is 24 and a son who is 21. 
Many of you have children and grandchildren. 
The government is asking them to pay 9.9 per cent - I am sure it is 9.9 per cent because the minister wanted the number to be under the figure 10. That represents 10 per cent of their income, and it will increase with inflation. 
The $35,000 that they pay on today will inevitably be more tomorrow.  
As inflation eats away at it and the numbers rise, that number remains the same. 
This goes against everything we have ever done on this program since its inception in 1966. 
It stays the same. 
In 10 or 15 years, that $3,500 will be worth $1,500, $1,000, $500, depending on what government does and what happens to inflation.  
Senator Taylor :
Elect the Liberals and it will be high!  
Senator Tkachuk :
If we elect the Liberals, inflation will be high? 
We already know that! 
Let me continue in that vein. 
 Debates of the Senate Hansard )
 ) Debates ( the Hansard Senate
 Senate of ) Hansard the (
 ) ( Debates the Senate Hansard
Tuesday, September 30, 1997 
 1997 30 , Tuesday September ,
 1997 30 , , September Tuesday
 , 1997 September , Tuesday 30
 , , 30 Tuesday 1997 September
 Tuesday 1997 September 30 , ,
 1997 , 30 Tuesday , September
 30 , , September 1997 Tuesday
 Tuesday 30 , September , 1997
 , 30 , September Tuesday 1997
 , Tuesday , 1997 30 September
 , Tuesday , 1997 30 September
 Tuesday , 1997 30 , September
 , 30 1997 September Tuesday ,
 , September Tuesday , 1997 30
 , Tuesday September 30 1997 ,
 Tuesday 1997 , , 30 September
Conduct of Business-Notice of Inquiry 
Hon. William M. Kelly :
Honourable senators, I give notice: 
That on Thursday next, December 11, 1997, I will call the attention of the Senate to the way in which the Senate conducts its business.  
QUESTION PERIOD 
Federal-Provincial Relations 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Province of Quebec-Request for Particulars 
Hon. Fernand Roberge :
Honourable senators, my question follows the announcement made yesterday regarding the government's decision to set at $12.5 billion the cash floor for transfer payments made under the Canada health and social transfer (CHST). 
The government would have us believe that this amount represents an increase in health care payments. 
However, the figures indicate otherwise.  
The following year, in 1999-2000, they will only be $3.748 billion. 
Yet, the government claimed yesterday that it was implementing a stable transfer system. 
In fact, cash payments paid to Quebec for health and education will be reduced by over $300 million over a five-year period. 
Honourable senators, I remind you that these cuts are in addition to this year's reduction of $700 million compared to last year. 
Could the minister make inquiries and inform the Senate of the reasons why, in spite of a cash floor set at $12.5 billion, Quebec's share will diminish by $307 million over the next five years?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
The federal government cut its own spending earlier, more drastically and in greater measure than transfers to the provinces. 
The government has made it clear that it will use increased fiscal flexibility to make strategic investments in priority areas, and action was taken early and directly on that commitment based on favourable fiscal results that emerged this past spring.  
With respect to individual provinces, I do not have those numbers. 
 Tuesday , September , 1997
 , Tuesday 30 , September
 , September 30 Tuesday ,
 September 30 1997 Tuesday ,
The Senate met at 2:00 p.m., the Acting Speaker, Richard J. Stanbury, in the Chair.  
 2 Stanbury . . in ., Chair the p , Richard J . Acting The 00 : , Speaker Senate m at met the
 the . J ., the Chair . in Senate 00 Acting p , The : , . at 2 m met Richard Speaker Stanbury
 , , Stanbury Speaker Senate met 00 Richard Chair the p . 2 m The : the . . J in Acting ., at
 Acting Stanbury Senate 00 in . met , the at The . J : ., p Chair Richard . , 2 m the Speaker
 ., : 00 Speaker met The . , at the J 2 in , Stanbury Senate Acting Richard p . the Chair m .
 . ., . Acting Senate Speaker p Richard m , Stanbury The at Chair 00 . J in the 2 the met , :
 Acting m 00 the . in , 2 at met . Speaker J Senate p Chair Stanbury the , : ., The . Richard
 00 , ., , in Speaker p at Acting m : Richard 2 Stanbury met the the . . J . Senate Chair The
 . p 2 The , ., 00 Stanbury Senate : J Speaker Acting . the in the met at , . Richard m Chair
 ., Stanbury m the . Senate p met : Acting The Richard Speaker , . 00 Chair J , at in the 2 .
 m Stanbury ., J : . Acting 00 The the Senate p , , in . 2 Speaker Richard . met at the Chair
 2 The , J , in ., m Stanbury . met . . Richard Acting Speaker the Chair p at Senate : the 00
 : the Acting Speaker Chair , m 00 . in The the met , Stanbury Senate . J p 2 Richard . at .,
 00 the . Speaker met 2 Senate The ., , at p . the m Stanbury . , : Richard Acting J Chair in
 met Speaker the . at in 00 , m ., Chair . Stanbury : . Richard The the , p 2 J Acting Senate
 met 2 . : Chair in at , . Acting ., J . Stanbury the m Speaker Senate The , Richard p 00 the
What is in it for you? 
What is in it for the Minister of Finance? 
What is in it for anyone to rush this bill through Parliament by December 19? 
No reasonable explanation has been given to me, and I am sure no reasonable explanation has been given to my honourable friends, other than the PMO, Mr. Goldenberg and Mr. Martin, telling you to pass this bill by December 19. 
They are telling you not to think about the consequences, because they are right. 
How do we know they are right? 
Why not take more time, honourable senators?  
Senator Gigantès :
Having listened to you, we know they are right.  
Senator Tkachuk :
Why not take the time - 
Senator Gigantès :
And the tedium?  
That is what we need to tell them at Christmas when we go home; not that we passed the bill.  
Hon. Roch Bolduc :
Honourable senators, I will not go back over the very important points raised by my colleague with respect to the intergenerational inequity in this bill. 
I would like to look at other aspects of the problem.  
Honourable senators, the government is proposing to amend the CPP. 
I would have found it appropriate to examine all the major aspects of the plan at this time. 
This has been done for some important facets such as its survival, its management and its performance. 
 The Senate met at 2 : 00 p . ., the Acting Speaker , Richard J . Stanbury , in the Chair .
 2 : J Senate Richard at . 00 in Speaker . the Stanbury m ., Chair met , Acting The . p the
 the , Chair . Senate m Acting the Richard at , in Speaker . ., met : The p . Stanbury 00 2
 m the The J Chair . : in ., Richard the 00 Acting Stanbury , met , Speaker Senate . . 2 p
Prayers.  
 Prayers .
 . Prayers
 . Prayers
 Prayers .
 . Prayers
 . Prayers
 . Prayers
 Prayers .
 Prayers .
 . Prayers
 . Prayers
 . Prayers
 Prayers .
 . Prayers
 Prayers .
 Prayers .
Forestry 
Demolition of Government Laboratories-Possibility of Restoration of Funding-Government Position 
Answers to Order Paper Questions Tabled 
Energy-Department of the Environment-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Energy-Department of Justice-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Energy-Department of Multiculturalism-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Energy-Department of Natural Resources-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Defence-Status of Clothe the Soldier Project 
Defence-Status of the Armoured Personnel Carrier Replacement Program 
Business of the Senate 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
Second Reading-Debate Continued 
Canada Cooperatives Bill 
First Reading 
Criminal Code 
Interpretation Act 
Bill to Amend-Second Reading-Motions in Amendment-Debate Adjourned to Await Ruling of Speaker 
Motion in Sub-Amendment 
Quebec 
Linguistic School Boards-Amendment to Section 93 of Constitution-Report of Special Joint Committee Adopted 
 Prayers
 Prayers
 .
 .
THE LATE JOHN M. MACDONALD 
 THE M JOHN MACDONALD LATE .
 MACDONALD LATE M JOHN . THE
 . M MACDONALD THE LATE JOHN
 JOHN LATE M THE . MACDONALD
 THE . LATE JOHN MACDONALD M
 MACDONALD JOHN LATE THE M .
 . THE JOHN MACDONALD M LATE
 M MACDONALD THE LATE . JOHN
 MACDONALD LATE JOHN M . THE
 . M MACDONALD JOHN LATE THE
 LATE JOHN M MACDONALD THE .
 . M LATE THE MACDONALD JOHN
 MACDONALD JOHN LATE . THE M
 JOHN LATE M MACDONALD THE .
 . JOHN THE LATE M MACDONALD
 MACDONALD THE JOHN M . LATE
Are you recommending that the fund be divided into four $25-billion portions and that so many firms administer each $25-billion portion in its entirety? 
Or are you recommending that one firm be responsible for one sector, such as the real estate sector and another firm be responsible for another sector?  
Senator Bolduc :
Honourable senators, in my opinion, it could be by sector, but my preference would be for the total to be broken down into four portions covering a variety of investments. 
Otherwise, if you have a block of $25 or $30 billion in real estate, you know what that means. 
Senator Meighen :
You mentioned decentralizing the decision-making process, did you not? 
Do you see any advantage to having decision-making centres such as the firm handling the $25-billion segment being located in different parts of the country?  
Senator Bolduc :
In Quebec, when the problem came up in connection with the pension plan in 1966, we insisted on having our own plan. 
I am not saying that this is how it should be across Canada; that is not my point. 
What I am saying is that, in Quebec, at the time, Jean Lesage had made it very clear that the fund was designed to provide social security. 
That is why we fought so hard for the Caisse de dépôt et placement at the time: to have this flexibility.  
I am not saying this practice should be generalized and extended to Ontario or any other province; it may cause problems I had not thought of so far. 
There is no doubt that it could be more difficult for some provinces. 
I do not exclude however the idea that provincial politicians could bring pressure to bear on this organization so that, when investments are made, people from each region benefit. 
To what extent will ethics and conflict of interest rules be overlooked? 
My experience tells me and I can tell you that it is going to be complicated.  
Hon. Terry Stratton :
Honourable senators, I should like participate in the debate on Bill C-2, the Canada Pension Plan.  
 THE LATE JOHN M MACDONALD
 THE . LATE JOHN M
 JOHN THE MACDONALD LATE .
 . MACDONALD THE M LATE
Tributes 
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
The Minister of Finance is rushing so that he can get another $400 million in taxes for the 1997 tax year. 
The brunt of this bill is being borne by middle- and lower-income workers.  
Merry Christmas Canada. 
Let us give Canadians a Christmas present by defeating this bill. 
Let us kill the bill.  
We are well aware of the Liberal record. 
We resent the fact that this bill will not be given full Senate scrutiny. 
We also know what will happen when things go wrong with this bill, as they will. 
I outlined the government's record on making promises. 
We know its record on responsibility. 
I can just see it. 
When this bill is in shambles, Paul Martin will be 95. 
Jean Chrétien will be 95 or 96 or 102.  
Senator Taylor :
They will still be in power.  
Senator Tkachuk :
He will not take responsibilities. 
The Grits will never take responsibility for their actions, as they did not when they cancelled the Somalia inquiry, and when they made false accusations against a former prime minister. 
I don't know who, but I'm not responsible."  
There was not an iota of evidence to prove that what they were saying was correct. 




Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
 Alasdair ) Government . the B of : . Leader ( Graham Hon
 . the Alasdair Graham ) Government Leader ( : . of B Hon
 Leader : Hon the of ( Alasdair . . B Government ) Graham
 . ( Leader : . of Government B Graham ) Hon Alasdair the
 ( Government ) B the Alasdair of Leader Graham Hon . : .
 ( . Government of Alasdair . Hon Graham : Leader B the )
 ( Leader Graham of : Hon B Alasdair Government . ) the .
 ( : B Government Graham Leader ) . . the Hon Alasdair of
 Graham ) of B the . ( Hon Government . Leader Alasdair :
 Hon . Leader Government ( : of . Alasdair Graham B the )
 ( Alasdair ) B : Graham Leader Government of . the Hon .
 ) : Graham B the Alasdair ( . Government Hon Leader of .
 Graham : Leader . . B the ) Hon Alasdair of Government (
 . . Graham of ( the Government : Leader Hon Alasdair B )
 . Alasdair : Graham ( the ) Leader . Hon of B Government
 B . . Alasdair Graham of Government ( : ) the Leader Hon
While numerically they may not be impressive to others, surely they must be to the Parliament of Canada, the guardian of minority rights. 
Surely, the Parliament of Canada cannot subscribe to the notion that the rights of minorities can be altered, much less obliterated, by a decision of a majority when, at best, that majority may have a detached interest in the concerns and preoccupations of the minority.  
Some assurances may be found in a statement made by the Quebec Department of Education in a advertising supplement which appeared in The Gazette of Montreal on November 29. 
It is headed: "Confessional Schools and Services." 
I will read the two pertinent paragraphs. 
This is the official Quebec policy, from the Department of Education, on confessional schools and services under the new linguistic board system. 
It states: 
The change from religion-based to language-based school boards does not mean that all Québec schools will become secular. 
Each institution will have the option of maintaining or reviewing its current status as a Catholic or Protestant school. 
Students will continue to take religion courses or to receive pastoral animation or religious care and guidance services if they so desire.  
Before the end of the third year after the linguistic school boards are in place, the schools will be asked to consult the parents and decide whether or not they wish to maintain their confessional status.  
Those unfamiliar with Catholic and Protestant school boards in Montreal and Quebec City should know that in many cases, particularly in the Protestant system, it is the language of instruction which predominates. 
Many schools have little, if any, religious content, while in others it is very strong. 
Parents already have a say in how much religion they want their children exposed to and that will continue under the new system.  
While section 93 guarantees are only a matter of religious denominations, the essential characteristics of the resulting Quebec school system have, nonetheless, been linguistic. 
One does not speak often of going to a Catholic or Protestant school any more. 
One usually speaks of going to a French or an English school. 
It was inevitable, then, that the committee would be drawn into a debate on how the amendment of section 93 might affect linguistic rights, particularly those claimed by the minority.  
While section 23 of the Charter establishes minority linguistic education rights, Quebec is not bound by all its provisions and so has adopted legislation in this field which, in effect, creates two classes of English-speaking Quebecers as it distinguishes between those educated in Canada and those educated elsewhere. 
Only those parents educated in English in Canada can pass on the benefit of minority English language education to their children. 
 Hon . B . Alasdair ( Leader of the Government ) :
 Graham . Leader Alasdair of . Hon Government ) : the B
 : . Leader B Graham Alasdair ) the . Hon Government of
 Government Hon ( : . Leader . Alasdair B Graham of )
Honourable senators, many of you know that Cape Breton is a lovely place of deep valleys and spectacular vistas. 
 of know . Breton you is of valleys deep vistas Cape that many senators place Honourable a lovely and , spectacular
 Honourable vistas you know and of of lovely is senators spectacular that . , Cape Breton deep a valleys place many
 lovely know that and vistas senators you a is valleys of , Cape spectacular deep many Breton Honourable of . place
 Honourable Cape place is lovely Breton of . senators , and deep spectacular a vistas know many that valleys of you
 many , place a senators of you is know Honourable and Cape lovely of . deep Breton spectacular vistas that valleys
 you of , a of is lovely many deep place spectacular . that valleys and Honourable vistas know Cape senators Breton
 is many . Cape and Breton of valleys lovely you senators vistas of deep that spectacular , know Honourable place a
 , a spectacular and Honourable Cape you vistas lovely place know . Breton of senators of deep that is valleys many
 many of , a of deep lovely valleys senators Cape and . know is Breton spectacular you place Honourable vistas that
 many spectacular place of valleys , vistas of that Cape senators Breton Honourable a and lovely know deep is . you
 you lovely know spectacular is Honourable . , vistas many place Breton senators deep valleys of that a of and Cape
 spectacular lovely vistas Honourable place a you is senators Cape that know of Breton . of many deep , valleys and
 , of that valleys Cape and lovely a many you vistas of place Breton know Honourable deep senators . spectacular is
 know that lovely . deep you spectacular of place Breton , Cape valleys vistas and is Honourable senators a of many
 Cape Breton place lovely deep that , valleys Honourable know many vistas and is of . senators you of spectacular a
 spectacular Breton Honourable Cape lovely . you deep many is place , a valleys of of vistas and that know senators
However, past experience suggests that, notwithstanding the fact that we do meet on Wednesdays at 1:30 p.m., we often sit well beyond three o'clock. 
On one occasion we had witnesses waiting for upwards of an hour.  
Senator Kinsella :
Thank you, Senator Stewart.  
Perhaps I might address the Deputy Leader of the Government, then. 
By way of recapitulation, this issue is important for all honourable senators. 
A request for leave has been made by the Chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee to allow that committee to sit tomorrow, Wednesday, even though the Senate may then be sitting. 
The issue is that Wednesday, in our common understanding, was to be a short day to allow committees to sit on Wednesday afternoons.  
Not just today but at other times, Senator Stewart has brought to our attention the fact that committees operate on that assumption and arrange their business plans, only to be frustrated in executing their business plan by the Senate going way beyond 3:00 or 3:30 p.m. on Wednesday afternoons.  
Senator Stewart has explained to us that that is the main concern. 
He would like some assurance from the leadership on both sides that, on Wednesdays, we would try harder to respect that tradition. 
We on this side agree to make every effort to complete our work on Wednesday afternoons at around 3:00 or 3:15 p.m. If you can also agree, perhaps we do not need to have this motion.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, is leave granted?  
Senator Kinsella :
It depends upon the answer.  
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, we must make an effort to allow committees to sit. 
They do invite witnesses, many of whom come from out of town. 
We inconvenience them if we are not able to hear from them.  
 Honourable senators , many of know that Cape Breton is a lovely place of deep valleys and spectacular vistas .
 deep senators lovely is know Honourable of a of many vistas and . Breton you spectacular that place , Cape
 Cape lovely place is valleys you many senators know of spectacular and deep that , vistas a . Honourable Breton
 spectacular vistas of Honourable is of valleys that Breton know , place Cape . you many and senators deep lovely
Its quiet beauty, mixed with the rich culture and fierce pride of its inhabitants, makes it a place which instils incredible love and loyalty in those fortunate enough to call it home. 
 and fortunate place instils beauty loyalty Its in . and home , mixed those makes love with fierce pride of enough call it rich to , inhabitants its culture quiet the which it incredible a
 a those mixed to . culture in place incredible , of instils beauty inhabitants its pride quiet the fierce and loyalty love fortunate , makes enough home Its and rich which with it it call
 it instils place which and , mixed love with culture . makes pride and Its to fierce quiet enough , inhabitants incredible it of in call beauty fortunate the home loyalty rich those its a
 loyalty rich , those home a which incredible the it of . enough with place Its beauty makes call and , in mixed and its quiet fierce it fortunate love pride inhabitants culture instils to
 of fierce call its culture it which place home , , a those and the fortunate quiet with Its it rich instils loyalty mixed enough and beauty incredible love . to pride makes inhabitants in
 its Its . love beauty of the which a quiet call it , instils enough , inhabitants culture mixed loyalty pride it fierce and and to makes fortunate those place incredible rich with in home
 its those pride inhabitants . , home to with mixed quiet loyalty fortunate in the it fierce culture which instils and beauty love rich enough and place of incredible call Its , it a makes
 mixed it its makes enough , home in Its fierce pride love the incredible of with rich quiet loyalty those fortunate beauty and it , culture which call place a to inhabitants instils and .
 makes which instils love of fierce to , fortunate mixed call place loyalty and those it culture the . quiet its a enough rich incredible beauty inhabitants and with it in pride , home Its
 fortunate quiet makes and call to place pride incredible and in of , mixed love loyalty with those home it inhabitants instils a , rich Its it fierce the beauty which enough its . culture
 with its in makes loyalty which place culture mixed pride to enough instils beauty quiet rich a of it Its , and and it inhabitants fortunate the fierce call love , home incredible those .
 its it makes , inhabitants which culture rich of place love and Its mixed incredible , call to . pride enough a it loyalty quiet fortunate home beauty and the instils with in fierce those
 enough fortunate , love it loyalty place its mixed and incredible quiet beauty of it those in makes culture a the and pride inhabitants fierce which . to Its instils with , home call rich
 mixed those love culture enough its it in , to home with it place and rich call fortunate quiet , a Its which loyalty fierce the incredible instils beauty pride makes . of and inhabitants
 makes loyalty culture it and of fierce . it to love with a call pride the those Its which mixed inhabitants rich and , beauty instils , in place its fortunate enough quiet home incredible
 of makes instils home . mixed rich to love call , fierce in place it a enough inhabitants its it pride fortunate and and which the with Its incredible loyalty those beauty culture quiet ,
That is what section 93 says.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
No, section 93 does not say that.  
Senator Grafstein :
The Province of Quebec, by its lawfully elected assembly, has requested a resolution amending the Constitution. 
How can I ask them to respect the Constitution if I do not respect the Constitution? 
I respect the Constitution.  
Honourable senators, this is a lawful request done in a lawful way. 
Perhaps certain words are egregious, but it is done in a lawful way, and I am prepared to support them. 
To my mind, the fact that they are prepared to proceed with their reforms before we legislate in any way, shape or form is their business; it is not my business. 
My business is to uphold the Constitution when they request we uphold processes under the Constitution.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
The reform of the school system in Quebec has nothing to do with the Constitution, even less with section 93. 
That was admitted in front of the committee.  
I will give you the answer to my question, and it should trouble all of us. 
The answer is that Quebec wants to be exempted from providing Catholic and Protestant teaching in the public school system. 
It has nothing to do with the linguistic school system, which will be in place - if the calendar is met - before the beginning of the next school year. 
They want to erase religious instruction from the school system, which is imposed on them. 
Narrow as it may be, unfair as it may be, and discriminatory as it may be, it was still renewed in 1982 and given protection from the Charter only 15 years ago. 
That is the reason. 
 Its quiet beauty , mixed with the rich culture and fierce pride of its inhabitants , makes it a place which instils incredible love loyalty in those fortunate enough to call it home .
 Its and call incredible place loyalty its inhabitants . makes the enough a which mixed home it quiet with fortunate it instils love of rich and those pride beauty , in fierce , culture
 love and quiet mixed to with loyalty it culture , and inhabitants a of Its rich its place makes pride , fierce beauty it fortunate the incredible instils enough which . home in those
 and , . with which it home those beauty and it of to fierce enough love rich Its mixed fortunate call its culture pride loyalty a quiet , makes place inhabitants instils in incredible
As a matter of fact, there are those who still insist that there are two kinds of Cape Bretoners: those who were born there and those who wish they were born there. 
 they born there two Bretoners there fact . wish who of kinds those are of As were were born there that a insist there those Cape and still matter , : those are who who
 were who those those they there wish As that of Cape there who born are a were kinds . are Bretoners those there and , of : fact matter there who born insist still two
 : still Bretoners were there born were they As are two those Cape who that kinds those are who of who , wish and . insist there there there born fact those matter a of
 As were of who are insist a those who are wish and Cape there that born Bretoners , fact born those . of were those : they kinds there still there matter two who there
 and kinds were a born they two wish of are those insist , still those matter Cape As who who there there born of that are were there . those fact there who : Bretoners
 who Cape insist two kinds : those are wish matter of there those born . still who are there those that a and there fact Bretoners born of , who there were were As they
 matter are who that kinds there a of there there two fact still those born . born : and who they who those of , were were insist Bretoners wish Cape As there are those
 As there are matter those of insist they who a that still and born born Cape kinds , who : those are of wish there who were there fact two were there Bretoners those .
 fact , were who who who kinds wish . of still As there there a born those were matter they are born are Bretoners those insist and there that Cape : two there of those
 were insist there two who are of wish there they fact those those : who Cape who , matter are kinds . there Bretoners still that there born born and a As of those were
 were that who who Bretoners a those who wish As matter there still of kinds they two of born are born : fact are those those were there there , . there Cape insist and
 born those still there those fact Bretoners are of : a that those Cape are wish of were insist who two they kinds there and born matter , there As who there who . were
 , . those a still wish there Cape of : who those they As fact there matter two born those there of born who and there who kinds insist were Bretoners were are are that
 : that As who born there are those kinds born there were were they there wish fact Bretoners those of who Cape and there still matter two those who . are insist , a of
 , . fact born born two of still were are those : those who insist they who As a were there who matter are wish Cape there of there Bretoners that there those kinds and
 Cape . : still matter a who who kinds those there of and they that two born are , those born of As there insist fact are those there who wish were there Bretoners were
Activities planned around December 10, 1997 for the launch of the 50th Anniversary commemorative year of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) 
National Defence 
Lack of Helicopter for Number of Navy Frigates-Government Position 
(Response to question raised by Hon. J. Michael Forrestall on November 20, 1997) 
An eleventh detachment is required for Canada's full time commitment of one ship to NATO's Standing Naval Force Atlantic.  
Maritime Command employs a three-tiered approach to fleet readiness: ships fulfilling national commitments are at High Readiness; ships in refit or major maintenance periods are at Extended Readiness; and, the remainder of the fleet is at Normal Readiness. 
Ships at Normal or Extended Readiness do not normally require Sea King detachments to fulfill their operational role. 
As well, certain taskings such as sovereignty, coastal and fisheries patrols may not require a Sea King detachment. 
Therefore, ships can be deployed at sea and operationally ready for a mission without a Sea King detachment embarked.  
Forestry 
Demolition of Government Laboratories-Possibility of Restoration of Funding-Government Position 
(Response to question raised by Hon. Mira Spivak on November 20, 1997) 
In response to the federal government's Program Review, the Canadian Forest Service (CFS) underwent strategic restructuring to rationalize its operations and to reduce infrastructure costs in the interest of providing maximum funding to research within the context of a reduced operating budget. 
As a consequence, Petawawa National Forest Institute (PNFI) was identified as one of the several Natural Resources Canada (NRCan) operations to be closed as part of a redefined departmental initiative to refocus our Science and Technology (S&T) programs. 
These programs address issues of national and international significance and service our clients through stronger, more effective partnerships with the provinces, industry and other players in the forest sector. 
All the major programs from PNFI have been transferred to the five current CFS research Centres and accordingly the majority of basic research activities from PNFI are ongoing. 
Claims of expenditure for upgrades prior to decommissioning were in fact for operational maintenance, purchase of equipment and some site enhancements. 
With the closure of the site all research equipment and transportable assets relevant to ongoing program activities have been moved to other CFS research Centres with their respective researcher's programs.  
The final phase of deconstruction has been delayed twice in order to seek alternate tenants for the townsite. 
The site in its current state represents a safety risk both in terms of security and liability and requires significant annual expenditures for heating and infrastructure to simply be maintained.  
 As a matter of fact there are those who still insist that there are two kinds of Cape Bretoners : those who were born there and those who wish they were born there .
 there kinds born those and insist those born they wish of : As a fact two there of who Bretoners are . are who were were that there matter who , those still there
 those , fact they matter are of : of who a As who were were there born those born there there there two still wish kinds are and . Bretoners insist that who Cape
 : kinds and , were they who of those are those Cape fact there born who there wish who two a those matter were . that insist Bretoners As of there born are still
Some people even consider their birth on the island as a personal accomplishment, rather than a biological accident. 
 , birth biological a on Some island their people accident as . than rather accomplishment personal a consider the even
 their personal on even as biological birth consider island than a accomplishment , people rather Some the accident a .
 than island rather a as the on , . accomplishment their Some even birth a accident biological personal consider people
 birth the their rather , on consider a people personal even accident . biological accomplishment a island as Some than
 birth as rather people biological accomplishment , a accident than consider the Some personal on even a their island .
 people , a . their as Some birth accomplishment biological consider personal on rather accident the island than a even
 , birth Some on the than accident a consider . a biological their even as island personal accomplishment rather people
 as . on people biological accident , birth rather a a consider the even Some personal island their accomplishment than
 even . a island accomplishment the birth consider biological on a than , their accident personal Some people as rather
 people Some biological their personal consider than island on as accident even the birth accomplishment rather a a , .
 birth consider biological their a accident on than island accomplishment the . people Some a , as personal rather even
 a personal a people as island than Some accident their . accomplishment biological , the on even rather birth consider
 consider even a than rather people a on accident personal biological accomplishment Some the . their birth island as ,
 birth than accident consider island a rather , even . a the Some accomplishment people biological their on personal as
 Some people . biological accomplishment on personal island the accident than a rather even as consider birth a their ,
 a accomplishment accident the biological consider personal Some people rather a birth even . their island as than , on
Honourable senators, my figures show that, four years ago, the provinces received more than $19 billion in cash transfers for health, education and welfare through what was then known as the Canadian Assistance Program and Established Programs Financing. 
The government's math provides some good news, as the original plan was to give them even less.  
The problem is that some provinces will get less under the new scheme while others will get more. 
Indeed, seven of the ten provinces will actually see their cash transfers fall even further, including all of Atlantic Canada.  
The cash transfer to Nova Scotia will fall from $427 million to $411 million, which is a difference of $16 million. 
The transfer for Prince Edward Island will fall from $60 million to $59 million, which is a reduction of $1 million. 
The cash transfer to Newfoundland will fall from $281 million to $251 million, which is a difference of $30 million. 
New Brunswick will lose $11 million. 
The total loss to the Atlantic provinces is $58 million.  
At the same time, three provinces, Ontario, Alberta and British Columbia will see their cash payments actually rise. 
Atlantic Canada's loss is their gain.  
Can the Leader of the Government tell us if his government believes that it is fair to ask the provinces that can least afford it to continue to receive less money year after year by way of support for health, education and social assistance?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
I thank the honourable Senator DeWare for doing the mathematics for me. 
I only wish I had done it myself prior to coming into the Senate today. 
I would be happy to investigate the reasons why those particular numbers appear in the manner in which she has presented them.  
Senator DeWare :
I appreciate that. 
It will not matter that we are less able to raise money than the so-called "have provinces."  
Honourable senators, because the population of the Atlantic provinces is not growing as fast as Ontario, Alberta or British Columbia, the smaller provinces will get less cash while the larger ones will get more. 
 Some even consider their birth on the island as a personal accomplishment , rather than a biological accident .
 on . a accomplishment rather biological consider a personal birth even their people as than , accident the island
 birth the people as . consider accomplishment a personal a rather even their than island on accident Some biological
 a biological accident , birth rather a their Some consider the on personal island . accomplishment as even than
Having said all of that, you will know that I speak with a lot of pride and just a little bit of prejudice.  
 know will said bit and a pride , little of just with lot that I you all prejudice speak of Having . of a that
 a of know just with and a will I little lot said of speak all . Having , that pride of you prejudice bit that
 bit pride know of a with I , all prejudice of and you just a Having will that said that lot speak of little .
 . little know with a I said Having and of will that all speak lot of pride that just prejudice you , a bit of
 a of just know lot , said prejudice pride that that all speak of will and little . of with a you Having I bit
 little that , will Having just a I . of lot know said prejudice bit a pride that all you with and speak of of
 pride a little . all will of just , a of speak that you said I bit lot prejudice of Having know with that and
 prejudice of a Having just , pride will speak that all I little a of of with and you said . know lot that bit
 of will just pride that lot I prejudice know a , that all bit of Having . you little a of and with speak said
 all a you of I lot Having speak said with and know pride that a . bit , just of of that will prejudice little
 just little bit I speak that . said Having you a with know of a all that prejudice and of of pride , will lot
 and of all will prejudice said Having that that , you know pride of of . little bit speak lot just a a I with
 of all bit Having a know you and that prejudice a pride of , I lot little just that said speak will . of with
 little . with that and know just prejudice bit a a will that of Having lot all of , speak I of pride said you
 pride I bit little Having will . and of know a you that of just said , of that lot a all with speak prejudice
 of of just of prejudice that a I little , pride all speak will said and you bit lot Having a know that . with
Some Hon. Senators :
Hear, hear!  
Senator Stratton :
I thank the honourable senator for her question. 
It was an excellent question, and it is one that she should ask of the government. 
She should ask the government what they are doing to communicate the changes to our pension plan system as a whole.  
Senator Chalifoux :
I am asking you.  
Senator Stratton :
First, because of the $600-billion debt that the pension plan has, I do not think that we can privatize it at this time. 
I do not think the people the honourable senator talked about, and the people of my generation, are prepared enough financially to make that transition. 
You cannot do that immediately. 
One needs only consider the situation of Chile. 
Chile is a long, skinny country on the west coast of South America, and I really do believe they have a communications problem there as severe as ours. 
I told honourable senators the story of the finance minister in Chile, going on television every three weeks to a month, and breaking down the new plan into segments, talking to the people, because they all have television, and communicating in that fashion. 
That was the government's way of dealing with it in Chile. 
The only way to communicate is eyeball to eyeball. 
You have to get out and talk to people in their backyards. 
There is no great hurry for this bill to get through, at least not to the degree that you could not do that. 
Why not insist that your government take our committee out there to talk to your people?  
 Having said all of that , you will know that I speak with a lot pride and just a little bit of prejudice .
 pride with that of a know lot all you , Having just a and little prejudice . bit of of will said I speak
 prejudice lot you pride I little all know bit just of a a with and will Having that speak said of . of ,
 you that speak little bit said know I a pride will a of all . that of Having , lot of just with prejudice
Today I rise to pay tribute to one of Cape Breton's most outstanding native sons. 
 rise outstanding tribute s sons most Cape . of Breton to one native pay Today to ' I
 Cape s of most sons ' native to pay one outstanding to Breton I Today tribute . rise
 Cape s ' pay one Breton Today most of sons I to outstanding rise tribute . to native
 tribute Cape of . rise ' I outstanding native pay Breton to s most one sons Today to
 s ' to native Breton . outstanding pay of Cape most sons tribute to one rise I Today
 native tribute ' to one pay rise outstanding s of most Today Cape . I Breton sons to
 one ' pay I . native rise Cape s to sons tribute outstanding to most Today Breton of
 rise to one pay Cape I to . ' native s tribute Today most sons Breton of outstanding
 s I Today native to of . rise ' Breton sons tribute outstanding Cape one to most pay
 most tribute Cape sons . one of outstanding native rise pay Breton Today to to I ' s
 I native rise one of pay to sons s . tribute to Cape most outstanding Today ' Breton
 Cape I outstanding native s one Today pay to sons to Breton most of ' tribute . rise
 to Today pay Breton most I ' to tribute Cape s of one outstanding rise native . sons
 s Cape rise sons tribute Breton most outstanding pay ' to to one I native Today of .
 of tribute Breton pay one most s ' native I to Cape Today outstanding sons to rise .
 native pay Today sons I to Breton tribute ' s . outstanding to of Cape most rise one
I thank the Leader of the Government for his answer. 
I should like to point out that Manitoba is distinct from Alberta, as are all provinces.  
In their December 1 announcement, the government also revealed that not until 1999 would they be able to provide more detail as to the costs and specific actions that would be required to meet our Kyoto commitments. 
Assuming that it will take some time to implement the actions that the government will propose in 1999, it could be the year 2000, 2001, 2002 or 2003 before the government takes steps to meet its Kyoto targets. 
Some of these actions will undoubtedly entail negotiations and agreements with provincial governments, which means it could be as late as 2006 before the government can meet the targets which were set out.  
Perhaps the Leader of the Government in the Senate could tell us in which year implementation of the Kyoto decisions will begin, because, surely, that must have been taken into consideration prior to the Kyoto meeting.  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Yes, honourable senators, discussions were held, and consideration was given to when the new objectives or conclusions of the Kyoto conference might be put in place, or kick into place, if I may use that terminology.  
I do not believe a final agreement has been reached on that. 
I know that the Government of Canada will cooperate with the provinces and territories and, in partnership with industry, the environmental groups and individual Canadians, develop a practical, flexible, step-by-step plan for reducing emissions. 
Many economic analyses of potential costs attributable to taking action to reduce emissions have been done, but no conclusions have been reached respecting timing or actual costs.  
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Informetrica Study on Meeting Targets-Government Position 
Hon. Mira Spivak :
Honourable senators, late last week, the consulting firm Informetrica released a study entitled, "The Scale of the Challenge for Reducing Canadian Greenhouse Gas Emissions." 
This report states: 
We conclude that there is almost no chance of meeting this goal in Canada under any reasonable economic scenario...  
And I stress this last part: 
...given current commitments to action.  
Could the Leader of the Government tell us if the relevant ministers are aware of this study, whether there have been any responses, or what the reaction has been to this prestigious firm's study?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
 Today I rise to pay tribute to one of Cape Breton ' s most outstanding sons .
 s of pay tribute Cape native to rise ' Today outstanding I most one sons Breton to
 ' Breton rise Today one s native . pay to Cape to I tribute sons most outstanding
 tribute to Today native to Cape . s Breton I one rise of pay sons outstanding most
One of the greatest tributes I can pay my old friend and colleague is that no man or woman ever bore greater love for Cape Breton; no man or woman ever bore more loyalty to its people than the late Senator John M. Macdonald.  
 for its to than no the ; my greater is man or that ever man late of M old John more bore no can greatest ever Senator I people tributes woman Breton pay loyalty . love or . One friend woman Macdonald colleague Cape and the bore
 can late loyalty man . bore people John pay Cape tributes I woman the for no ever ever greater or no Breton to colleague that Senator the than greatest woman its old man love or my . friend and Macdonald M of bore ; is One more
 John late than no people man or Senator pay man my love woman Macdonald ever the or old Cape for I colleague woman is more . the bore One ; Breton loyalty of greater that and its no M can . friend ever greatest to bore tributes
 can old pay is loyalty Cape ever Senator tributes ; man greatest the man the Breton to greater woman or of love no people One colleague no that woman bore bore for my and . . M than friend or late Macdonald ever its John more I
 tributes John people . M . its woman man can ever love pay Macdonald the friend man loyalty I Senator old that of for Cape bore late no is woman no and ever One the greatest Breton to bore or or more colleague greater ; my than
 late woman I its ever Breton One greater old no that woman pay the bore Senator tributes and or man the John . more colleague friend of man loyalty than greatest people love for Macdonald . to Cape ; no is ever can M my bore or
 M or John Macdonald Senator my woman and no tributes the to more woman bore man ever ; no pay for people the . of its greatest ever than loyalty One Breton man or colleague Cape . old can late friend I that greater love is bore
 pay loyalty late more or that One no Breton than of and no I to greatest is old bore for friend people my colleague man woman Cape the love . ever John Senator greater can or bore M the ; ever its Macdonald . man woman tributes
 man Breton friend is of to woman than and my . bore love pay . John woman man for greatest M no Senator no late Cape the ; greater I old people can more its the Macdonald ever or bore One ever colleague or tributes that loyalty
 ever . its my greatest than of pay Macdonald no or Senator people I or man tributes woman love M ever One bore . to can woman that man bore John Cape colleague Breton and for is loyalty no the more ; old greater late friend the
 Macdonald than One . the ever John for the and can greatest Senator more bore of no or pay loyalty Cape love colleague woman no M to woman ; people man its friend bore tributes I is . late greater Breton ever my man that or old
 Breton ever bore tributes for is to the that woman no M Senator I than or bore more friend ever people old colleague my no One Cape loyalty . of love late ; Macdonald greatest pay man man can or John . the and its woman greater
 that for can John colleague its than the M my more friend man no . and or woman loyalty ever old One Cape Senator ever bore or is bore to pay greatest people tributes woman love Macdonald . ; I Breton man no of the greater late
 the loyalty John and late no Breton M friend can more its old or man Macdonald greatest bore . people is my for greater the I Senator ever or tributes One pay woman bore ; ever man to woman love colleague Cape . than that no of
 old greater late for ; love . the greatest M Breton John or woman to is . friend One pay Senator the its woman loyalty that of more or my than bore man no colleague Cape bore ever no tributes ever Macdonald people man I and can
 Senator its colleague Macdonald Cape or people my ever bore no can ever . One loyalty John . to more or tributes greater woman than I old Breton M ; no woman man man the friend bore love that is greatest pay late for of and the
Canadians who turn 69, 70, and 71 this year have only another month and a half to convert their RRSPs to an annuity or a RRIF. 
If they fail to do so, they could lose up to one-half of every dollar they have in their RRSPs to taxes; yet many of these same Canadians are not aware that the government has lowered the age to 69 and of the deadline for making the conversion.  
Indeed, a survey conducted last spring found that only about 30 per cent of RRSP holders aged 50 to 70 were aware of these new rules. 
Bearing this in mind, and considering the confusion that now exists about this matter, will the government consider extending the conversion time so as to ensure that no senior citizen is forced to hand over half of his or her life savings as a result of being caught off-guard by this proposal?  
In other words, will the government ensure that they are not nailed with more taxes?  
Senator Oliver continued: 
We were told that the net tax grab from this and other measures that restrict tax assistance for retirement savings, notably yet another freeze in RRSP contributions, would total about $40 million this year and $175 million next year. 
We were not told how much of that came from lowering the age for RRSP conversions.  
When that many Canadians are unaware of what is happening, we have a severe problem.  
On November 20, I said: 
Honourable senators, I wish to address my question to the Leader of the Government in the Senate. 
It dates back to October 1, 1997, to a question asked at that time by Senator Meighen, which is only 51 days ago.  
I will quote Senator Meighen, who said: 
It has been 51 days!  
On November 25, I said the following: 
In a paper released the week prior to November 25, the Association of Canadian Pension Management said that the Seniors Benefit will stifle savings. 
To quote from their paper: 
Middle-income Canadians might simply decide to supplement government programs through the accumulation of non-income producing capital, such as homes or interest-free mortgages for their children. 
They may simply avoid retirement savings plans that generate heavily taxed income...  
They go on to suggest that Ottawa structure the Seniors Benefit in such a way that it will not result in an effective tax rate in excess of 50 per cent.  
 One of the greatest tributes I can pay my old friend and colleague is that no man or woman ever bore greater for Cape Breton ; no man or woman ever bore more loyalty to its people than the late Senator John M . Macdonald .
 ever . Macdonald my that old woman bore John late no ; friend of or Senator ever greater woman pay . bore Cape the I loyalty no M One is people man than Breton man tributes can colleague or greatest for its the to love more
 . ; Senator love Cape and the or ever M Macdonald bore loyalty to is tributes no than ever the John no late One woman friend of its for bore that colleague people or my greater old I Breton man woman . man more greatest can
 woman Macdonald man can for pay the of man bore ever ever . or love or loyalty greatest I and old Cape that than bore colleague to my no One M friend ; Senator John woman is the . its more no tributes people greater Breton
He was buried on June 24, 1997: 37 years to the day he was first called to the Senate by Prime Minister John Diefenbaker. 
 to was the called John buried Minister He first was he day on by 37 Prime 1997 the 24 to , years June . Diefenbaker Senate :
 1997 Minister years the 24 Diefenbaker buried June he Senate first called Prime was to was on He John , the day by . : 37 to
 the 1997 24 by buried Senate . June on years John Prime Diefenbaker to the to was 37 : was He he day Minister , first called
 by Diefenbaker John . buried on first was He 37 , Senate to Minister years : the the called Prime he 1997 to 24 was day June
 buried : was Senate to the on 1997 the was day Diefenbaker to called Prime 37 John Minister . first by years June he He , 24
 1997 Minister he was 37 . buried the Diefenbaker by day June was first years Senate called : Prime to 24 He John the on to ,
 first on 37 to was Diefenbaker Prime Minister , June the was day He : buried Senate John he . 1997 called by the to 24 years
 John Senate the , 1997 37 he by Minister Diefenbaker to on to 24 . buried years was June Prime the first called was day : He
 John Senate , 1997 years Minister the : by 24 to the Prime Diefenbaker was buried on June He was 37 first . to day called he
 was 24 John on the day Diefenbaker was years called buried first : he to Prime . to He the June 37 , Senate 1997 by Minister
 by on first called 1997 Diefenbaker John was , He June . buried years the he Prime day Minister the was to 37 to 24 Senate :
 Minister He first was 37 to 24 by Senate day the buried June was the to years Prime Diefenbaker . 1997 : called John he , on
 1997 by 24 June called day John was : to Prime , he the buried the Minister was Senate He first years 37 on Diefenbaker to .
 John : was day the he to . buried first 24 years Senate Minister called the 37 Prime He , to on June was by 1997 Diefenbaker
 He . Senate to the was the , he buried Prime John by to 37 June called on 24 Diefenbaker : first day years was 1997 Minister
 24 Senate buried was years the 1997 Minister day the to , to he was : Prime called 37 He . on Diefenbaker June first by John
If he is so competent, what has this big brother been doing for 20 years? 
He agreed to give pension benefits to people, but forgot to levy what he needed to be able to do so, and what he levied, he loaned to the provinces at such low rates that, unless there are drastic changes, the plan will go bankrupt.  
Here we have a classic case of public mismanagement. 
On the one hand, they hand out goodies and, on the other, they forget to charge for them. 
And now they have learned nothing from this sad tale:
Ottawa is asking for even more from everyone and tells us that this time it will invest the money wisely and that it will be for the future good of all.  
Honourable senators, I would much more prefer looking after my own retirement, and I know many Canadians who would like to be free to do what they want with their own money.  
There are many other aspects of this bill that require serious consideration, but I will deal here with only one or two.  
The bill provides for the creation of a government agency responsible for investing the funds collected from contributors to the Canada Pension Plan.  
This agency will have more or less the same powers as the Caisse de dépôt du Québec. 
The management of these funds will therefore be given to a government monopoly, as was done with the generation and distribution of electricity.  
However, how can the performance of a monopoly be assessed? 
And do you know of any monopoly where unacceptable mismanagement did not occur at one time or another? 
There is a long list of unfortunate cases of poor management - we have all heard stories of the extravagant expense accounts of people in the public sector who think they own the jobs they are holding - of bad investments, such as those made in real estate by an agency like the one we are creating, for example, of consumer gouging - we have seen monopolies charge excessive rates, because they were the only ones providing the service - of unreasonable benefits, such as complete job security for employees at the expense of the taxpayer - as has occurred in crown corporations you are familiar with - of differences in economic and social objectives - this also happened when an agency was created and given a mandate, and then after 15 years, it started doing something else, we have all seen this - of conflicts of interest involving officials who make no difference between their personal interest and that of the public, et cetera.  
There is a long list of horror stories involving monopolies. 
The whole history of the public sector, here and elsewhere, is full of such unfortunate incidents. 
I will not speak here about what occurred in Eastern Europe or in the Communist Bloc. 
But in this country and in countries like France and England, such cases have been a constant feature of the past 15 or 20 years.  
You may tell me that such things also happen in the private sector. 
Of course, but in this case it is everybody's money that is at stake, and not just private funds.  
 He was buried on June 24 , : 37 years to the day he was first called to the Senate by Prime Minister John Diefenbaker .
 on 24 buried : Senate was 1997 years to first , day to he John called Minister was June by the . He the 37 Prime
 37 , called Minister years : was buried 24 the Diefenbaker on Prime was John the day He to he by to first June Senate .
 Diefenbaker 24 to called June 1997 the buried 37 years first on day Senate John He . : Prime the was by Minister was he ,
If John Macdonald is looking down on us right now - as I am rather sure he is - he is probably having a good laugh at the irony of all that. 
 is that right he as is all good having now I he probably on looking John - a If irony down of laugh rather at am - the Macdonald sure us is .
 a as If now at laugh he is looking right is sure irony - he the good us Macdonald is all on I of John probably rather am having . down - that
 at of is having - now is as all probably Macdonald am irony laugh good John us . the that down on he right rather he looking sure is I - If a
 - of sure us now am is he is all John laugh I the probably on good that down If Macdonald rather a irony at right looking having - is . he as
 irony now is down I probably at John all that . is If looking a right having - rather sure - Macdonald good us he he is of the laugh as on am
 irony he is all looking If us I of that laugh is right sure the . probably am he good down as Macdonald - John is at rather - now a having on
 laugh probably down right - irony all on If looking of Macdonald rather a that John is he I he now as the us is am - is at good . having sure
 a am having right on of laugh all the - . now as rather good - I John us is at that sure If is looking Macdonald is down probably he irony he
 the now as looking is having - rather John right on Macdonald all - at of irony is laugh good sure If is us that he down . probably a I he am
 is the John Macdonald . laugh a now as is us at sure looking - probably of - that having rather good on am If he down all right he irony is I
 at is rather good is am having looking . I he he right Macdonald - probably that If us the as John - now on is all down of laugh irony sure a
 right - now us is John Macdonald probably a at as irony that I good . is laugh he down he sure is looking If the of - am having rather on all
 all Macdonald rather John a laugh . am us good I right - now If the sure at - down on he probably of that irony is having is looking is as he
 probably on good am is at - is laugh us of Macdonald the he that down If now irony sure right is John - looking as he . a I having rather all
 he sure a he that now looking is on as is - is the probably am Macdonald If - irony having us rather at laugh all John of right I down good .
 of John irony right sure laugh having looking that I If as rather . us now is - is all am the is good at probably he a down he on - Macdonald
On the Catholic side, we had the position of the archbishops, as limited as it was. 
We had Catholic school boards and Catholic teachers. 
I remember specifically cross-examining Catholic teachers and asking whether they had discussions with students and their parents respecting the changes. 
Their view was that they represented the broad consensus of parents and students as it applied to this amendment. 
All parents wanted a change to renovate the school system, and this was the best modality in which to do that.  
I agree with Senator Lynch-Staunton, Senator Wood and Senator Lavoie-Roux that this is not perfect. 
However, in addition to the evidence, we did refer to opinion polls that seemed to suggest a strong support for reform along these lines.  
Yes, the resolution is imperfect. 
We would like to have done it "our way," as Frank Sinatra used to say, but we must deal with the Province of Quebec in this case. 
We had to bend imperfect tools to see whether they fit our minimum requirements. 
In my view, they did not fit our minimum requirements; they fit our reasonable requirements for constitutional amendment.  
Senator Wood :
Is it not true in the letter from the bishops of Quebec - the letter the honourable senator read - that they were in favour of repealing section 93? 
They questioned linguistic rights and suggested that denominational guarantees established by 107 be maintained. 
There was a caveat there that my honourable friend forgot to read.  
Senator Grafstein :
I find myself in great difficulty defending Roman Catholic theology let alone letters from Roman Catholic archbishops. 
I will leave it to each senator to come to his or her own conclusion on the testimony and on the letters, which are appended to the report.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Honourable senators, Senator Grafstein is quite right in stating that reform is needed. 
 If John Macdonald is looking down on us right now - as I am rather sure he is - he is probably a good laugh at the irony of all that .
 the right . probably now having that is irony is looking Macdonald I he am is laugh rather - John he If of all as good sure us a on at down
 probably am If of down good all sure John - having - he . is is that irony as is a looking now at on the us laugh Macdonald rather right I
 on as down John at am Macdonald I good now - looking laugh all of If irony is that a he rather - probably is he . the us is having right
I visited him personally shortly before he passed away. 
 him away . visited before I shortly personally he passed
 away shortly before personally he him I visited . passed
 personally I passed away visited him he . shortly before
 he away him before I passed personally . visited shortly
 I personally . visited passed shortly he him away before
 him before he personally away I passed shortly visited .
 he shortly before him . visited personally passed I away
 visited him he I . shortly away personally passed before
 him before personally visited away he passed I shortly .
 he him . shortly passed I before visited personally away
 passed him before he shortly I visited . personally away
 I visited he passed before shortly away . him personally
 him passed visited away shortly . personally before he I
 away I passed personally before he him shortly . visited
 away . passed personally he before shortly I visited him
 away I passed personally him shortly visited . he before
Again, science has interfered with a social plan. 
Retiring at age 65, dropping dead three to six years later, depending on your gender, was good for governments. 
At its inception in 1965 - payments started on January 1, 1967 - in order to be eligible for CPP benefits, you had to be 68, and 68 was about the same year that the average male died. 
It was the perfect pension plan:
Pay all your lives, and then die just as the first cheque is put into the mail. 
If there was a postal strike, the government had the benefit of both worlds - the pensioner was dead and the cheque was in the mail.  
From the beginning, the CPP was simple, but it was misnamed. 
It was misnamed because it is also a life insurance program. 
However, it is a silly program when it is part of a pension plan.  
Instead of cancelling the benefit, there is an argument made as to whether it should be means tested when cancelled or not. 
That is an area where we can save a lot of money because, as people are dying today, cheques are going out in the mail, at $3,500 a shot. 
Yet we do not have enough money to pay proper pensions when people are alive.  
It is also a disability program. 
There is nothing wrong with having a disability program, but it is part of the Canada Pension Plan now. 
It is part of a payroll tax to buy universal disability insurance, and then the social engineers took over.  
I want to give senators an historical perspective. 
There have been many amendments made over the years to the CPP. 
Yet, the government has said, "We will not touch that fund." 
However, they touched the other fund. 
Since 1973, they have been making new legislation and implementing new programs. 
 I visited him personally shortly before he passed .
 him passed he visited shortly I . before away
 personally before he him passed visited shortly I .
 shortly personally visited he passed away before him I
Tough and razor sharp, even in his final days, he always said he would leave the Senate when they carried him out.  
 , said leave would when carried they sharp Senate days his final him Tough and he always . razor , he even out in the
 said , he in even he sharp Tough out Senate always the leave carried days final they , and when razor . his would him
 out his and the he they always Senate in leave , when even final would said razor , him Tough . he sharp days carried
 Tough carried he razor he they the Senate always when sharp final , in his out him leave , even said days would . and
 leave out him in he his , Tough said they he the days always razor when , even . would carried and sharp final Senate
 they always him out razor final leave even sharp his the Senate , Tough he , . days said in he would and when carried
 him and in the he out his Tough sharp razor . carried would Senate always days , said final even he they when , leave
 days his in . the he Tough sharp final he him carried said would they , , always even and when out leave razor Senate
 would final carried . leave , days the when him they he he Senate razor and out always even said , Tough his in sharp
 when days his said razor the always out they carried . in he Senate , final leave him , would even and Tough sharp he
 him even final said he . in , always he the razor carried Senate his when Tough sharp would days they and , out leave
 . he said carried , leave sharp when razor the Tough days would Senate and always his , they in final even him out he
 he leave , him would and final they Senate in days always his sharp he said Tough out carried , . the even razor when
 always they leave the said final , him and Senate . carried even days he when would his Tough , in he sharp razor out
 , him Senate and final would he his in sharp out . said even carried razor days always , when he they the Tough leave
 said the he . in Tough days him when out final , even his always would and Senate , he carried they sharp leave razor
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
Second Reading-Debate Continued 
Canada Cooperatives Bill 
First Reading 
Criminal Code 
Interpretation Act 
Bill to Amend-Second Reading-Motions in Amendment-Debate Adjourned to Await Ruling of Speaker 
Motion in Sub-Amendment 
Quebec 
Linguistic School Boards-Amendment to Section 93 of Constitution-Report of Special Joint Committee Adopted 
Quebec 
Linguistic School Boards-Motion to Amend Section 93 of Constitution-Debate Adjourned 
Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration 
Sixth Report of Committee Adopted 
Bill to Amend-First Reading 
Canada Marine Bill 
First Reading 
Aboriginal Peoples 
Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples-Committee Authorized to Study Recommendations 
THE SENATE 
 Tough and razor sharp , even in his final days , he said he would leave the Senate when they carried him out .
 razor said days even , he would when they final his the in , and . sharp carried him leave always Tough Senate out
 carried days leave sharp him the . even Tough Senate final when said would out and , he , razor he they always in
 Senate always his . and he when sharp out razor him , he Tough final leave the said in would days they , carried
I spent many a day and night in the Sydney airport travelling to and from Ottawa with John M. He was meticulously punctual, arriving as much as two hours before scheduled lift-off. 
 - Ottawa was many two as with , off He lift punctual meticulously travelling I M day from a in night much the as and arriving before to hours . John Sydney spent . and scheduled airport
 much travelling in arriving a day Ottawa I punctual night many as . was He John lift M Sydney and off airport - to . , and from hours with two as scheduled spent the meticulously before
 many as and Sydney M and in before He I much to travelling was - , Ottawa off spent with from as meticulously two scheduled John arriving punctual . night day . lift hours a airport the
 travelling - lift M and arriving and scheduled He was as John much two meticulously in to punctual Ottawa the before off as airport Sydney , with . I spent day night from hours . many a
 off much hours Ottawa as day two punctual night spent from I - a as arriving in to scheduled many , lift and John and . the He M travelling was before . Sydney meticulously airport with
 a - to . as and off meticulously I punctual many much scheduled spent before as He John night , Sydney arriving in was day the airport . hours M travelling from lift with two and Ottawa
 lift as airport I arriving , and from a . He much Ottawa before to off with and Sydney in meticulously John - two . as travelling night M day scheduled was punctual many hours the spent
 lift meticulously off spent was before as travelling the arriving hours . from a as punctual with Ottawa much - . scheduled and He airport John many , to two M day night I in Sydney and
 Ottawa night . and He many before much off with was day Sydney to two - arriving a the . I airport scheduled lift punctual meticulously travelling M and as hours , in as spent from John
 punctual - and to two as M from hours , was a . much scheduled arriving John in as Ottawa many He travelling off lift before the night and meticulously I Sydney airport with day spent .
 from as many the and . spent to with day John hours I scheduled , arriving night travelling off Sydney and - . as in He was lift meticulously airport M much two a before Ottawa punctual
 and I arriving from lift , John night with travelling - much airport and M to . day spent a as two before . Ottawa scheduled as He Sydney meticulously punctual in was the hours many off
 meticulously and lift airport much a as spent M arriving He I the - from many , and Sydney John with before Ottawa travelling in night was day off as to two . . punctual scheduled hours
 and . day meticulously off M was many and John . two , lift - arriving travelling I to hours scheduled in from much night before He a Sydney airport as with Ottawa as punctual the spent
 the day and , before with airport arriving as as spent Ottawa two a meticulously lift off from scheduled was John M Sydney - travelling night in . hours to . punctual I many much He and
 to punctual and from I many Ottawa meticulously the lift a before two scheduled as - arriving . day Sydney , night M . with was in hours airport off as travelling and much spent He John
It costs more money. 
I am not saying that is bad. 
I am just saying that all of a sudden it costs more money because women are either lucky or live better or cleaner lives than men, and they live longer.  
Senator Gigantès :
They survive us. 
It takes strength and intelligence.  
Senator Moore :
Meaning we are not intelligent?  
Senator Gigantès :
Not as much as the women are.  
Senator Tkachuk :
Then the benefits were extended. 
The provision went from having to live together for seven years to share in CPP benefits - in other words, when one died the other one would pick up the cash - down to one year. 
If you lived together for one year, the other person was considered your husband or your wife, and benefits again were extended to the surviving spouse - another increased cost.  
Yesterday, Senator Kirby alluded to the possibility that there may be other social changes in those arrangements. 
I know what that means. 
It is possible that governments may recognize gay marriages, and I think he wanted to let us know that there may be these kinds of changes taking place. 
That is fine, if the government wants to do that. 
Now you have two guys living together; one dies, the other one is picking up some cash. 
That costs more money. 
 I spent many a day and night in the Sydney airport travelling to and from Ottawa with John M He was meticulously punctual , arriving as much as two hours before scheduled lift - off .
 airport day much arriving spent in . punctual . He travelling and and Ottawa from , two before meticulously to was I as scheduled M the night - off hours lift Sydney with many a as
 night as with hours was scheduled meticulously to in as many M I off travelling a Sydney lift He arriving airport . , and punctual from . - the before day spent much John and two
 John Sydney punctual travelling night meticulously and spent scheduled arriving was - day Ottawa in I M , . to and with the many a off two much from He before . lift airport as hours
He was easily recognizable by his hat, his slightly stooped figure, his ever-present cane in later years, his sizeable shoes - which will be very hard to fill - and his very determined step.  
 his He figure hard hat be later cane his to fill his - - , present , shoes by very - was his ever which step determined will recognizable sizeable stooped very his years . in and slightly , easily
 later his , to present shoes be ever years his easily , was . his slightly by , determined - fill step stooped hat - - which cane figure recognizable and will his He his very very hard sizeable in
 his to very his figure and his - be , easily shoes later by recognizable hard hat - present cane which very was , step his will - ever his determined slightly He stooped , . years sizeable fill in
 his . figure his recognizable determined was later - to and present his sizeable by , , cane his easily will He - , be - which hat slightly his years very stooped ever step very shoes fill hard in
 his - very , fill later , will his his hard sizeable , stooped to shoes by - determined years . his in - which and his figure hat present recognizable easily cane step ever be He very was slightly
 - fill sizeable , his very his shoes his determined his present stooped very cane years recognizable - in - figure , by will and slightly easily . was step ever be He to which , hat hard his later
 , very , was sizeable determined - years slightly - present cane hard figure his , his He his and - easily fill be shoes ever . step hat very to will later which stooped recognizable his his by in
 later be slightly which will very shoes fill sizeable , . recognizable to He determined cane easily years his very step , - was stooped ever his hard by his in - figure , - and his present his hat
 stooped years cane ever by - present and slightly determined in step shoes figure hard later very easily , his , He be which his very his will hat - - fill . recognizable sizeable his to was his ,
 his be fill hard , in - He cane will and shoes sizeable present very figure his hat - step . recognizable his later very his which years was easily by , slightly his , determined to - ever stooped
 easily , his and very , - in fill sizeable years hat cane . very step his recognizable was to figure - present which later his determined stooped by his be shoes slightly hard his , will - He ever
 figure years step later was recognizable He very sizeable present , very slightly determined , in fill will shoes his hard his , and - by - hat to cane which his his . stooped easily be his - ever
 in was easily . fill by determined , very will step cane which He recognizable his hard ever his slightly stooped later - sizeable years his his hat - present his to and - figure , very , shoes be
 sizeable - very will hat by and present his cane his hard be later in his fill determined his shoes - , ever recognizable slightly . step - easily stooped He , which to very , his was years figure
 his stooped years to easily his cane his very He in his , fill will present - - , hard slightly - . be hat which ever determined step was recognizable shoes and , figure sizeable later very his by
 recognizable cane to stooped - fill shoes easily figure . very slightly which years , ever step hat determined was will sizeable - present his , his in by his very and He - hard , his later be his
They will not forget that.  
On October 30, Senator Tkachuk asked the following: 
Why is the government trying to fix the CPP by hitting hardest those least able to afford it?...  
Could the Leader of the Government in the Senate prevail upon his colleague the Minister of Finance to have his officials produce information showing the impact of the freeze in the earnings exemption for different ranges of income?  
For example, could data be prepared showing how much the freeze will benefit the government from those earning income below the poverty line relative to their family income, and how much it will save those with incomes above the poverty line relative to their total income?  
In other words, it is and will be perceived as another tax.  
On November 5, Senator Oliver said: 
They are increasing it by one month per year to give people time to adjust to the new reality of that retirement age. 
In effect, that will keep things in relative control.  
It should have been explained to Canadians that the government explored that method and rejected it for specific reasons. 
As others have said before me, people are living longer. 
While the age of 65 was formerly not achieved by many, it is being achieved by most today. 
That should be taken into consideration as a basis for increasing the age for retirement because it will decrease the burden on the young people who today believe that they will have to pay the whole shot for us.  
Senator Oliver continued: 
Honourable senators, in these times of slowing real incomes, increasing long-term interest rates, high personal taxes, increased CPP premiums, and ridiculously high EI premiums, where does the Leader of the Government believe that Canadians, who will receive less money from public plans, will find money to put away in their RRSPs to secure their own retirements?  
On November 6, Senator Oliver asked: 
Honourable senators, in 1995, the Department of Finance conducted a study on the impact of the increase in CPP premiums between 1986 and 1995. 
During that period, employee contributions rose from 1.85 per cent to 2.25 per cent of earnings, and the combined rate rose from 3.6 to 5 per cent.  
How many Canadians must pay the price for the planned increase in premiums?  
The Hon. the Speaker :
 He was easily recognizable by his hat , his slightly stooped figure , his ever - present cane in later years , his shoes - which will be very hard to fill - and his very determined step .
 easily ever to which . present fill He was hard - his his stooped and - be hat , step his his shoes slightly - , will by later his very in recognizable sizeable determined years , very figure
 was very determined his which his his figure later . shoes - ever fill slightly in - his stooped will his , by to He sizeable hat and cane hard present , , be easily recognizable step very -
 cane be figure determined in present will easily shoes to which his his slightly - ever later was He very , , sizeable stooped years , step - and his fill very . by his hard hat - his
I am sure he chuckled, too, when the Senate delegation arrived at the Sydney Airport on the day of his funeral. 
 the , too the delegation his on when the sure chuckled . Sydney day funeral he Senate of arrived at am I , Airport
 , . on I he Airport sure the the delegation funeral , Sydney too arrived chuckled at day am his the of when Senate
 at arrived he Sydney the , day Airport his the funeral chuckled I sure of . when on Senate am the delegation too ,
 , I , his arrived funeral Sydney the at too he Airport the sure am . chuckled delegation of on Senate day when the
 the I . too , day Airport the he delegation chuckled am on when sure Sydney Senate of the funeral his , arrived at
 Sydney sure at he Airport I delegation the Senate arrived the of am chuckled , . on his the too when funeral , day
 delegation the the chuckled too on arrived , when of the am at day Airport his he , sure I funeral Senate . Sydney
 of , sure the . on delegation he at Senate too the when funeral his Sydney day , I arrived am Airport the chuckled
 Senate his . arrived the , am on Sydney sure Airport delegation I , of chuckled he the too day funeral when at the
 sure at his I on , Airport am chuckled . of arrived the the too he delegation the when day , Senate funeral Sydney
 . his on I am Sydney day , when of chuckled he sure the too , the arrived the Senate Airport delegation funeral at
 Airport at . day on delegation , am he the Sydney sure too chuckled , the his Senate when the I arrived of funeral
 chuckled sure on Senate delegation funeral . , the Airport arrived am Sydney I of his the he the day too , when at
 at am sure Senate , day . , he chuckled the I too on delegation funeral arrived Airport when of the the his Sydney
 he the , Airport too am Senate at chuckled funeral the day . of Sydney arrived sure his when the on I , delegation
 the the Senate arrived his am Sydney he I Airport funeral when at the of , on sure delegation . , too day chuckled
However, the Liberals were in power a lot longer, so they are much more responsible.  
Retirement and earnings tests for individuals were eliminated in 1974. 
Benefits were provided to male and female contributors, to surviving spouses and dependent children. 
However, instead of taking it out of general revenue, the government took it out of the CPP because, in the old days, there was lots of money in that fund. 
There were not as many old people. 
There was a great number of working people, and lots of cash. 
They said, "We can throw it around." 
No one was thinking what would happen when people in the large demographic group turned 65.  
The amendments provided for the elimination of CPP children's benefits which previously applied - they changed it again - where more than four children of a deceased or disabled contributor had been eligible for such benefits. 
Now, if you have more than four kids, that is fine, too. 
However, it was another increased cost to what should be a pension plan. 
The government should have taken the money out of something else, or increased the amount of CPP premiums so that people were told the truth, and also told, "To pay for this it will cost you 10 cents or 20 cents more a month." 
The cash was there, so they used that cash.  
Legislation was enacted for spousal credits. 
When people get divorced, they have to keep up with the times. 
They can split the benefits. 
That was not done before. 
At the inception of this program, that was not allowed.  
Because men die earlier and women live longer, the money went mostly to women. 
It costs more money. 
 I am sure he chuckled , too , when Senate delegation arrived at the Sydney Airport on the day of his funeral .
 the too of funeral delegation sure on arrived I when Sydney the Airport Senate he chuckled , am . , day the his
 Senate funeral the am . on I chuckled too of , he day at arrived , Airport when the the sure his Sydney
 the sure am Airport the when Senate at arrived Sydney he . funeral chuckled too his on , the I of delegation day
Their arrival coincided with a rather large exercise being staged by the Canadian Armed Forces. 
 rather by exercise Armed being Their arrival coincided with staged . large Forces Canadian a the
 staged arrival Their being exercise by with Forces Armed coincided large rather Canadian a . the
 large rather exercise Forces with Canadian a being staged coincided the by Their Armed . arrival
 large a exercise Armed Canadian the Their rather . staged coincided with by arrival Forces being
 Canadian arrival with being large rather Forces staged coincided Armed exercise by . a Their the
 the exercise being rather Armed large . staged a arrival with Forces Their Canadian coincided by
 arrival Armed Forces the rather Their with being staged large a coincided Canadian by . exercise
 a exercise large with being Their rather the arrival by Armed staged . Canadian Forces coincided
 with rather coincided exercise the by a . Forces arrival staged large Armed Their being Canadian
 large Canadian staged Armed being by the a Their rather arrival . Forces with coincided exercise
 Forces exercise by large Canadian with rather coincided a being staged arrival the Armed . Their
 Armed the arrival with large Canadian Forces . being by exercise a rather coincided staged Their
 exercise with Armed staged . arrival the rather large a being Their by Forces coincided Canadian
 Armed a large rather . Forces with arrival being exercise Their coincided staged the Canadian by
 Armed being with exercise Their the large arrival by a staged Canadian coincided . rather Forces
 by coincided being Canadian . large the with a arrival rather Forces Their Armed exercise staged
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Concept of Differing Targets-Government Position 
Hon. Mira Spivak :
In the current discussions in Kyoto, the idea of tailoring reductions targets to individual countries' economic and social profiles rather than having a one-size-fits-all commitment has gained some currency, particularly in view of the most recent American proposal. 
Where does the Canadian delegation stand with respect to this concept?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government):
Honourable senators, the media is reporting, of course, on a possible deal on targets and time-tables which could see Canada accepting a reduction of 5 per cent from 1990 levels bythe year 2010. 
At this point, these reports are speculative, but negotiations are ongoing.  
National Unity 
Recent Remarks of Prime Minister-Possible Conditions of Secession of Quebec-Government Position 
Hon. Pierre Claude Nolin :
Honourable senators, I would like to return to the matter of the Prime Minister's statement last weekend on Quebec's secession. 
He said in fact last week in Quebec City that he would be prepared to negotiate Quebec's separation, if certain conditions were met.  
I would first like to know what conditions the Prime Minister was referring to?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, the Government of Canada has always said that Quebecers would not be kept within Canada against their will. 
That being said, breaking up a country is not a step that one would take lightly. 
Senator Graham :
The will of Quebecers to leave must be clearly expressed. 
In addition, of course, any process that would lead to secession must respect the law.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
 arrival coincided with a rather large exercise being staged by the Canadian Armed Forces .
 Armed being Forces exercise staged Canadian rather with a arrival large by coincided Their the
 staged Forces a coincided arrival by Canadian Their the Armed being large with exercise .
 . being Canadian large a rather by coincided with the Forces exercise Their Armed staged
The tarmac was dotted with several fighter planes, helicopters and big Hercules aircraft. 
 with several tarmac was The dotted . planes fighter , aircraft and big helicopters Hercules
 The planes big , with . several tarmac dotted Hercules was and fighter helicopters aircraft
 . The several aircraft Hercules fighter , big tarmac planes helicopters with dotted and was
 aircraft helicopters . and Hercules big with The tarmac planes several fighter dotted was ,
 dotted and . several was tarmac , planes big with helicopters aircraft fighter Hercules The
 helicopters was . aircraft dotted tarmac and planes , The big with several fighter Hercules
 was tarmac with The helicopters planes Hercules . aircraft , big fighter several dotted and
 Hercules The tarmac helicopters big with several fighter . and was dotted , planes aircraft
 planes fighter was Hercules aircraft several big tarmac , and The dotted helicopters . with
 Hercules several The tarmac dotted helicopters aircraft . fighter and big planes with was ,
 big The several with tarmac Hercules dotted helicopters aircraft planes was fighter . and ,
 , big several dotted and Hercules fighter helicopters aircraft . with planes The tarmac was
 fighter was several with The . Hercules planes aircraft helicopters and tarmac , big dotted
 several tarmac planes helicopters fighter aircraft was dotted , Hercules . The with and big
 planes Hercules helicopters , with . dotted big aircraft and was fighter tarmac The several
 several with was tarmac aircraft The dotted fighter helicopters planes . , and big Hercules
In my view, they did not fit our minimum requirements; they fit our reasonable requirements for constitutional amendment.  
Senator Wood :
Is it not true in the letter from the bishops of Quebec - the letter the honourable senator read - that they were in favour of repealing section 93? 
They questioned linguistic rights and suggested that denominational guarantees established by 107 be maintained. 
There was a caveat there that my honourable friend forgot to read.  
Senator Grafstein :
I find myself in great difficulty defending Roman Catholic theology let alone letters from Roman Catholic archbishops. 
I will leave it to each senator to come to his or her own conclusion on the testimony and on the letters, which are appended to the report.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Honourable senators, Senator Grafstein is quite right in stating that reform is needed. 
Actually, reform is well under way in Quebec. 
The new system, it seems, will be in place for the next school year. 
New linguistic boards will be set up. 
There will be some difficulties, but, overall, it is proceeding quite well.  
What linkage is there between the new school system in Quebec and the request to exempt Quebec from certain obligations of section 93? 
I do not see any.  
Senator Grafstein :
Honourable senators, there is constitutional law. 
Quebec wants to proceed by the rule of law. 
They are seeking to renovate their system under the rule of law and the Constitution.  
 The tarmac dotted with several fighter planes , helicopters and big Hercules aircraft .
 The helicopters fighter Hercules several was and tarmac planes dotted aircraft with , .
 The aircraft several and tarmac with fighter Hercules . planes , was big helicopters
 planes was . several aircraft big , with helicopters The Hercules dotted fighter tarmac
It was probably the biggest display of force seen in that area since the convoys were assembled in Sydney Harbour during World War II. 
 seen the It assembled that of during force were . display in Sydney area convoys in biggest War Harbour II World probably since the was
 display was seen Sydney in War were biggest assembled II the convoys during probably It area . World since that the Harbour in force of
 force World seen in probably the since was biggest . convoys It War during assembled Sydney that Harbour in area were II the of display
 force World the . of Sydney display Harbour II probably It assembled in biggest convoys seen that were the since War during area in was
 It the was assembled force World area seen display in convoys probably War . of during were in biggest the II that Harbour Sydney since
 It II since probably during was World that convoys . were Harbour of display Sydney in in War assembled force area seen the biggest the
 display War were of biggest in assembled during probably It seen since . Sydney force that the convoys was Harbour in World II the area
 force Sydney the was assembled Harbour were biggest World War in convoys It probably of since that in the seen II . area display during
 convoys the of Harbour in in World force the that probably was War Sydney biggest were . display area during assembled since seen II It
 seen that during assembled the area the War World were biggest Sydney It probably force was since in Harbour of in II display convoys .
 seen force . in display Harbour in of since that assembled II It biggest War was area the Sydney probably the during were convoys World
 convoys in probably Harbour . in were was assembled of since that biggest the II display during World the force Sydney area War It seen
 that seen area display in in the convoys Harbour II Sydney since was It were War assembled force World probably during the biggest of .
 were Sydney in probably the that II assembled Harbour War . in display World during the biggest convoys was area It of since seen force
 assembled was World since probably display the force biggest Harbour were seen of that Sydney . in convoys in II during It the area War
 area in the biggest force World were convoys was during since It probably Harbour Sydney seen assembled the display II that of . in War
Defence-Status of Clothe the Soldier Project 
Defence-Status of the Armoured Personnel Carrier Replacement Program 
Business of the Senate 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
Second Reading-Debate Continued 
Canada Cooperatives Bill 
First Reading 
Criminal Code 
Interpretation Act 
Bill to Amend-Second Reading-Motions in Amendment-Debate Adjourned to Await Ruling of Speaker 
Motion in Sub-Amendment 
Quebec 
Linguistic School Boards-Amendment to Section 93 of Constitution-Report of Special Joint Committee Adopted 
Quebec 
Linguistic School Boards-Motion to Amend Section 93 of Constitution-Debate Adjourned 
Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration 
Sixth Report of Committee Adopted 
Bill to Amend-First Reading 
Canada Marine Bill 
First Reading 
 It was probably the biggest display of force seen that area since the convoys were assembled in Sydney Harbour during World War II .
 that in of was area during biggest in . It the convoys War since were the seen World display Sydney assembled II probably force
 . during that Harbour Sydney World War were II biggest probably of display area assembled in It the in was convoys seen the force
 display It since Harbour force in of during the in area World biggest . II War seen probably that was assembled were the convoys
You could almost hear John M. say, "Boys, you really didn't have to go that far."  
 . , really hear , that M didn almost go ." Boys " John have say to t ' could you You far
 you Boys say , John far t ' You didn almost " that have hear ." . , go to really could M
 . ' that t almost M ." didn go far say could " have Boys You , to John you , hear really
 John ' say almost you " ." . have go You t hear M Boys didn , , far to could really that
 , have you t didn You " say ." that could Boys to far M John almost really ' , hear go .
 t ." John , Boys far ' hear , . say have You go M that " could you didn to really almost
 really M didn t almost have that ' , . to You John could far go hear ." Boys say " , you
 didn ' John that you far have could ." hear . , M " , t You almost to say really go Boys
 far almost ." t you ' , really M have could go " , Boys . didn say hear to that You John
 far that You Boys John have . M to really , go hear " almost t say ." you ' could , didn
 Boys ' have to say ." . hear " t that John , almost could M really go , You you far didn
 " , John say you have , You hear far t could almost to ' ." . that really M Boys go didn
 , have . t Boys almost You say John ." that " could hear , to really go you far ' didn M
 t you ." " M that John far You to didn say Boys ' almost , . could really , go have hear
 M to that didn far Boys could , ." almost go You you . have , hear really " t say ' John
 have " Boys John M go you really t ." far hear , to say , didn that almost ' You . could
What does the law say on secession?  
Senator Graham :
The government has asked the Supreme Court of Canada to rule on the legality of unilateral secession.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
I had thought that Mr. Dion answered that question himself on the weekend when he said that a UDI would be illegal.  
Senator Nolin :
The Prime Minister has said he was prepared to negotiate. 
The Leader of the Government in the Senate has said the government is not prepared to negotiate.  
This morning, the Quebec minister of intergovernmental affairs, Mr. Brassard, said, and I quote: 
This is what we have always said.  
Bear in mind that this minister is a separatist. 
I repeat what he said: 
This is what we have always said.  
Mr. Chrétien has acknowledged that the federal government would negotiate. 
Could the Leader of the Government in the Senate tell us under what authority the Prime Minister could negotiate?  
Senator Graham :
The Prime Minister would be negotiating on behalf of Canadians, but recognizing at the same time that nine other provinces and the territories are involved. 
I am sure the Prime Minister would take all of that into consideration.  
Senator Nolin :
The Supreme Court received the request from your government to decide on the issue of Quebec's secession. 
 You could almost hear John M . say , " Boys , you really didn ' t to go that far ."
 hear t . ' almost John you go far could M say to ." really Boys didn that " You , have
 really far have that you almost could , You ' John go Boys ." say , hear " to M . didn
 almost Boys have , . John that hear " go really You M , you ." far ' didn to t could
If he could speak to us now, he would be able to tell some wonderful stories. 
 able tell he wonderful . be he us speak some would to , to If stories now could
 stories could be able tell to now wonderful . he , If would us speak to he some
 he to If us to speak would could he be now . some tell able , wonderful stories
 be could If to would stories he he wonderful us now able to some tell speak , .
 could wonderful stories . he , able he to tell some would us If to now speak be
 some would wonderful could If . to be he he stories tell able us , to now speak
 wonderful If us some could now he tell he be would able to . speak to , stories
 he If , stories could he speak would to to able tell now us . some wonderful be
 If to he tell stories able wonderful now be us , he to speak . could would some
 now to wonderful he would tell stories able speak could be he us , some If to .
 stories would he some he . able could tell to wonderful , to speak be If us now
 now . some stories he us to could would tell he be to If speak wonderful able ,
 he . would wonderful to If to speak some able , could now tell he be stories us
 wonderful he speak us would If to be , stories tell to some could able . he now
 able would now speak to If stories us he . wonderful be some , to tell he could
 would wonderful . , now speak to could he us he able stories be to If some tell
Other than the simple response that there was a 1-800 number that people could call, I received no response. 
That is what the government determines is a sufficient communications plan for Canadians to understand what the heck is going on. 
That is a travesty. 
That, to me, is not responsible government whatsoever. 
Can you imagine a prime minister who said that he is a man of the people, a man who is determined to change the way government is done, now ramming through the most dramatic changes to our pension system without informing the Canadian public of just what the government is proposing and allowing input from them?  
Honourable senators, I refer to questions raised in this place over the last several months, questions that relate to the ever-increasing taxes that this government is imposing on the lives of all working Canadians. 
For example, on October 1, Senator Michael Meighen asked the following: 
My question relates to employment insurance premiums. 
Given that, according to best estimates, the account will be at a $16-billion surplus this fiscal year, could the Leader of the Government explain to members here today why his Minister of Finance refuses to consider any reductions of premiums...  
He went on further to state: 
Honourable senators, to bring C.D. Howe's quote up to date, "What's a billion?" 
To say that we should rejoice that the premium was not increased from $2.80 to $3.20 is a little like saying that the Leader of the Government should be happy that I am only going to whack him over the head three times instead of ten.  
It seems to me that employment insurance premiums should not be a primary method of fighting the deficit or the debt....  
Honourable senators, we are building this huge surplus and raising Canada Pension Plan premiums - in other words, it is a double tax on Canadians. 
You argue that the Canada Pension Plan is not a tax, but that is not how our kids see it. 
Our kids see it as a tax, because you are taxing their generation to pay for the retirement of our generation. 
It is a tax no matter what you say, and no matter how you say it.  
On October 23, I asked the following: 
Honourable senators, I rise to ask a follow-up question to the response of the Leader of the Government to Senator Meighen's question of October 1 on employment insurance premiums. 
The honourable leader stated that a cut in the EI premium would cost the government some $4.2 billion in lost revenues. 
 If he could speak to us now , he would be able tell some wonderful stories .
 stories . tell he us be speak would able he to If wonderful , to some now
 he us be to If could , to wonderful able . would he stories now tell some
 If to he to some us he stories wonderful speak would , be could tell . able
During those 37 years, he spent 22 of them as the Conservative caucus whip and participated in some of the most historic debates this country has witnessed. 
 some spent Conservative participated the in years 37 he and whip country as , the 22 them caucus debates this those witnessed of . most of has historic During
 has 22 debates participated During years spent those them Conservative in the as 37 he this and caucus country witnessed of of . most the whip , historic some
 the participated as , most of the During some 22 in caucus this those debates historic witnessed them 37 Conservative country he years has of and . spent whip
 witnessed spent the caucus of the During in country Conservative this 22 as some those debates . most years he them has 37 and of historic whip participated ,
 debates participated Conservative them historic those the years 37 of country this and caucus he 22 During witnessed , as the . has whip in most some spent of
 the has 22 as of debates caucus them in the . and those Conservative whip witnessed of participated historic country this spent 37 most some he , years During
 some the caucus most historic of those 22 has the of them this years spent witnessed 37 in country as Conservative , participated and whip . During debates he
 of whip in has this , 37 years of . country and spent historic the he 22 participated most the witnessed During as some caucus those them debates Conservative
 in witnessed this . he and debates them 22 as 37 whip historic years , of country the of participated caucus the those During spent Conservative most some has
 . and During he Conservative 37 some 22 caucus debates of those them participated the this , has whip spent historic the in of witnessed most country as years
 spent years participated he has of During debates . some as the caucus those historic this country the them whip Conservative , 22 of most and 37 witnessed in
 as 37 witnessed and . those 22 whip them most caucus of in has debates During he historic some the the country spent , Conservative of years participated this
 of whip some years the spent this caucus in participated During , he Conservative . 22 of them the most 37 those historic and debates country has witnessed as
 most historic whip those participated caucus he and . them the as spent in of of , the country 22 this 37 Conservative During some debates has witnessed years
 whip 22 the During this as and them participated , of caucus those of has debates . spent he witnessed historic years country most some 37 Conservative in the
 the country caucus some . spent as most has historic of and he those participated the 22 37 witnessed whip years debates them Conservative During , of this in
In Quebec, for example, if I remember correctly from its last report, the Caisse de dépôt already invests in almost 800 Quebec businesses.  
Now, how are these 800 to be selected and monitored? 
There is likely to be arbitrariness and patronage.  
In addition, the Board will be everywhere and inevitably set conditions. 
Businesses will have to toe the line as the provinces do when Ottawa doles out conditional funding, as you may recall. 
This concentration of power, this centralization will be unhealthy. 
This technocracy and its perverse effects make me nervous. 
I hope one day we will have nothing worse than Mr. Sorros' manoeuvres to criticize.  
The regulations governing investments and the behaviour of administrators have not been revealed. 
They are not ready. 
What guidelines will there be for administrators? 
A parliamentary review is therefore vital before their implementation.  
In concluding, I would say to the government that the preferable alternative to its bill would be to simply oblige everyone in the labour force in Canada to invest a percentage of their savings in funds under private management or let government assume its role by providing a safety net for those who could not set aside enough money for their old age.  
Here is an intelligent response to the challenge before us. 
However, and it is regrettable in this era of the welfare state, it seems to me that we prefer to make sweeping rules that apply to everyone in order to resolve the problem of a few.  
Hon. Philippe Deane Gigantès :
You talk with admiration of private investment management. 
How do you explain the disaster at Olympia & York, for example, under the management of Mr. Eyton, our colleague, and the fact that major players like Conrad Black closed Dominion Stores and took the money Dominion Stores employees had invested in a pension fund, a fund they never drew from? 
Are you telling us that the private sector will be more generous and wise than the Caisse de dépôt in Quebec? 
Senator Bolduc :
 During those 37 years , he spent 22 of them as the Conservative caucus and participated in some of the most historic debates this country has witnessed .
 in During debates historic this spent the country caucus and of those most 37 22 . has the some them participated years as Conservative whip witnessed , of
 debates witnessed Conservative in those country the , this participated historic years of caucus . as the he some 22 of most whip and has them 37 spent
 and debates 37 Conservative of this the the of historic most in has caucus whip them During those as witnessed country some 22 . , years he participated
He would reminisce on the bitterness of the flag debate; he would tell us about the debate on capital punishment, in which he introduced his own private bill on abolition; he would recall the great patriation debate, his strong views on changes to the abortion law, the causes he championed which concerned transportation, veterans, fishermen, coalminers, steelworkers, and so many others.  
 tell own strong ; and the he which the the transportation . debate many capital , changes flag on punishment bill would debate in fishermen private his concerned steelworkers others , abolition he great of championed , , law bitterness his ; causes the , the on He on debate , so he , patriation about would would on to , recall he abortion reminisce us coalminers veterans introduced the which views
 own he views , on would , introduced which private punishment abolition patriation recall strong changes flag reminisce to the debate so , the his , , debate great on many causes of veterans on debate would and championed . bill the his on would transportation the steelworkers ; he coalminers about fishermen the abortion others , , bitterness law , capital which tell he us He he ; the in concerned
 , on on . , so he , views patriation , coalminers capital on law which private bitterness the would he recall many he the ; strong reminisce abortion the which championed causes of flag us the his great would about on to , ; bill concerned tell debate debate , , he others , would introduced debate his punishment the veterans fishermen transportation abolition and own the He in changes steelworkers
 , in abolition coalminers recall tell , which the He , own would his us . steelworkers would of views debate he on on debate , the , would ; ; transportation introduced the flag others the punishment changes on he he causes the great many , about strong capital and his bill abortion on which law so patriation the , reminisce veterans championed fishermen he , to debate bitterness concerned private
 punishment he fishermen capital coalminers views on , tell so the he steelworkers his great strong the debate the recall abolition the would on to debate would bitterness , us on ; , he changes would his many transportation the of veterans patriation and , about debate on law reminisce abortion He he , , championed which own concerned bill the . introduced causes which , in , private ; flag others
 he the many , so would , to which , on would ; bill fishermen causes reminisce own about strong abortion which , the . great us transportation , private championed his law would others of his veterans abolition the coalminers introduced views tell debate ; and concerned debate debate he punishment he bitterness he the on recall in , steelworkers changes on , on patriation capital the flag the , He
 patriation causes punishment debate the , us veterans law bill private , ; own introduced would in transportation championed he capital , the would the which abortion he the recall his to on great fishermen which , so concerned , steelworkers changes the on debate abolition he on , of reminisce bitterness views coalminers he He and would tell debate many his . the , others strong , flag on about ;
 veterans , which abortion would flag on introduced others many bill championed causes recall the patriation transportation his the punishment he on , views so , private us he , coalminers ; the the debate of to bitterness changes in on his he concerned would he , . which debate He strong , great fishermen tell about reminisce the law capital on abolition ; steelworkers , the and own , debate would
 punishment on ; veterans in he bitterness private of reminisce the his he . changes on to , many ; the his on the the which concerned own , , views recall flag would he abortion the championed so and transportation law about would which great coalminers , introduced on fishermen others the , us would He abolition patriation steelworkers debate causes , tell , bill he , capital debate debate strong
 on views ; would on recall debate great transportation his the would which on the reminisce he strong , tell many ; bill introduced which in he would private debate , concerned , and , debate causes about steelworkers changes championed us own abortion law coalminers to veterans abolition fishermen his He , so flag punishment the the . capital the he , others patriation on he of bitterness the , ,
 recall others bitterness would , us introduced own veterans which law transportation , the abortion on debate concerned to ; , debate tell his he ; patriation coalminers the of abolition great bill steelworkers flag reminisce He about capital the debate causes views he many , the punishment would , strong which would fishermen his championed in on . on he changes private so he the , and , , on the
 causes fishermen ; his , on so debate flag great the patriation on which transportation He the which others ; law capital the steelworkers debate concerned about strong he , recall bill he , many his . on introduced , he bitterness own private , championed of tell the and , he would reminisce , would us , the punishment abortion debate the views on in coalminers to abolition would veterans changes
 the championed , and he , , concerned which own in causes would views , the strong us ; his reminisce , the steelworkers so the capital changes to recall debate He coalminers introduced many his abolition on would he of patriation he others debate bill law the great flag he , abortion punishment about which would on bitterness , on the fishermen transportation on , tell . ; veterans debate private
 about bitterness others fishermen in , transportation on ; views introduced . abortion veterans , the he tell debate own on us patriation on flag which capital his would , championed changes he abolition on reminisce debate the recall his the , He many steelworkers he he the and the the debate , , private would punishment of to , , ; so causes would great bill law coalminers concerned which strong
 flag recall abolition the , of bitterness his strong would , us debate law He the , ; his would on the would which great causes bill , which , capital championed he he debate the debate reminisce coalminers ; on the concerned he others the private , in on he veterans and tell patriation views . fishermen transportation so many on changes own introduced about to steelworkers , abortion , punishment
 , , the many , fishermen on great , on championed , the private his , He he on of law on in debate coalminers abolition the bitterness to patriation concerned steelworkers debate he capital the own flag and , so he . bill causes would veterans which transportation the introduced others strong abortion would reminisce tell changes about which ; us ; debate would his punishment , recall views the he
Elect the Liberals and it will be high!  
Senator Tkachuk :
If we elect the Liberals, inflation will be high? 
We already know that! 
Let me continue in that vein. 
Perhaps honourable senators opposite do not want to hear what Paul Martin will be doing, and the explaining that you will have to do back home in 10 or 15 years when your children ask you what you did about this bill. 
When they retire, their CPP benefits will be worth about what they put in, plus 2.5 per cent.  
I do not get it. 
I do not understand why we are being asked to do that to our children, so that those who are retiring today can receive full benefits and those who are retiring soon can get their benefits. 
I do not get it. 
I will try to explain it today, and - I hope I can convince you.  
The CPP is part of a larger program that Paul Martin is introducing. 
Everything involves reform. 
We will have a reform of the Old Age Security benefit, which is coming up after Christmas. 
It is important to get through this before Christmas so that we can consider changes in the cut-backs that will come due after Christmas. 
We on this side think that both matters should be discussed together because it is part of a pension program and a part of a social security net for people in this country who retire at 65 and who want to retire with some dignity.  
We strongly believe that this measure is a payroll tax and a job killer. 
Yesterday, Senator Kirby said it was not a payroll tax. 
The Department of Finance did a study in April 1995 which was reported in The Toronto Star . 
The study noted that the relatively modest increase of CPP premiums between 1986 and 1993 resulted in 26,000 fewer jobs. 
 He would reminisce on the bitterness of the flag ; he would tell us about the debate on capital punishment , in which he introduced his own private bill on abolition ; he would recall the great patriation debate , his strong views on changes to the abortion law , the causes he championed which concerned transportation , veterans , fishermen , coalminers , steelworkers , and so many others .
 bill views changes abolition abortion debate transportation would he capital on patriation veterans reminisce he , introduced flag , so He fishermen on the law ; steelworkers bitterness would in ; great he of many his us private the the his to concerned , , would punishment debate the he the coalminers championed which others on , debate , . tell causes , strong and , own on which about the
 the coalminers law bitterness to would , he so the reminisce strong in , would on debate , on changes abortion , which , He flag the , and others his , of he steelworkers patriation debate capital debate views he ; on the us causes he private transportation many . introduced great recall abolition on his championed fishermen own concerned tell punishment ; , which the veterans bill would about
 to the , bitterness his , changes abolition the and , would , strong debate steelworkers ; coalminers debate he great veterans punishment about . , on own others so he reminisce , , abortion the championed us the which would recall flag the He he of the debate , many on transportation tell in on would on introduced views law concerned ; private he bill capital causes his patriation fishermen
Think about it:
 Think : about it
 : it about Think
 : Think it about
 it Think : about
 about Think it :
 : it about Think
 it : Think about
 Think it : about
 about Think it :
 it : Think about
 it Think : about
 Think about : it
 about : it Think
 about : Think it
 : Think about it
 it Think : about
If Mr. Stronach is part of the "for" or "against" theory, then there is a problem with the whole concept put forth by my honourable friend.  
My honourable friend spoke of the Estates General, but he did not refer to their minority report, which covered over 70 per cent of their membership. 
Why are my figures different from those of my honourable friend?  
Senator Grafstein :
Again, honourable senators, this is a question of evidence. 
I refer all senators to the transcript.  
I wish to speak specifically about the fact that we are dealing with elites as opposed to the groups they represent. 
We questioned these representatives during the hearings as to whether their underlying groups agreed with the position they had taken.  
On the Catholic side, we had the position of the archbishops, as limited as it was. 
We had Catholic school boards and Catholic teachers. 
I remember specifically cross-examining Catholic teachers and asking whether they had discussions with students and their parents respecting the changes. 
Their view was that they represented the broad consensus of parents and students as it applied to this amendment. 
All parents wanted a change to renovate the school system, and this was the best modality in which to do that.  
I agree with Senator Lynch-Staunton, Senator Wood and Senator Lavoie-Roux that this is not perfect. 
However, in addition to the evidence, we did refer to opinion polls that seemed to suggest a strong support for reform along these lines.  
Yes, the resolution is imperfect. 
We would like to have done it "our way," as Frank Sinatra used to say, but we must deal with the Province of Quebec in this case. 
We had to bend imperfect tools to see whether they fit our minimum requirements. 
In my view, they did not fit our minimum requirements; they fit our reasonable requirements for constitutional amendment.  
Senator Wood :
 Think about :
 Think : about
 about : it
 it about :
John Macdonald's death at 91 meant an extraordinary career which spanned those of eight Prime ministers. 
 s career meant spanned eight John of death 91 Prime Macdonald at extraordinary ' an . ministers which those
 career those meant 91 an Macdonald John ministers Prime of spanned s at extraordinary . ' which death eight
 . ' those ministers an spanned of s career eight which extraordinary Macdonald Prime 91 death at meant John
 91 spanned an ' s at John death extraordinary Macdonald which those ministers meant career . Prime of eight
 spanned which at John s . ' meant of death Prime Macdonald career those eight an 91 ministers extraordinary
 an meant death spanned at ministers . which career Prime ' Macdonald eight s those John extraordinary 91 of
 of . eight Prime career 91 spanned an ' at meant death s which those Macdonald John extraordinary ministers
 eight those . spanned Prime 91 of an at ' death extraordinary which John s career Macdonald meant ministers
 s . which meant spanned at of career 91 death extraordinary ministers John Prime eight Macdonald an those '
 ' an s at eight . extraordinary ministers meant Prime 91 spanned which those Macdonald John of death career
 an Prime death of career s meant John spanned those 91 ministers Macdonald eight at . extraordinary which '
 s those at ministers . ' an John death meant extraordinary 91 which of eight Prime career spanned Macdonald
 ministers career of s an 91 eight Prime death ' John extraordinary Macdonald spanned . those at which meant
 of meant an s death extraordinary Macdonald . at career spanned 91 eight those which Prime ' ministers John
 meant spanned Macdonald career eight 91 John ' at death . ministers of which an extraordinary those Prime s
 an meant . career s 91 death of which ' spanned those extraordinary Macdonald ministers eight at John Prime
Report of Agriculture and Forestry Committee Tabled 
Hon. Leonard J. Gustafson :
Honourable senators, I have the honour to table the second report of the Standing Senate Committee on Agriculture and Forestry, which requests that the committee be empowered to incur special expenses pursuant to the Procedural Guidelines for the Financial Operation of Senate Committees .  
I ask that this report be printed as an appendix to the Journals of the Senate of this day.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is it agreed, honourable senators?  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this report be taken into consideration?  
On motion of Senator Gustafson, report placed on the Orders the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate.  
Present State and Future of Forestry 
Report of Agriculture and Forestry Committee Tabled 
Hon. Leonard J. Gustafson :
Honourable senators, I have the honour to table the third report of the Standing Senate Committee on Agriculture and Forestry, with a request that the committee be empowered to incur special expenses pursuant to the Procedural Guidelines for the Financial Operation of Senate Committees .  
I ask that the report be printed as an appendix to the Journals of the Senate of this day.  
( For text of report, see today's Journals of the Senate, Appendix "B", p. 321. 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this report be taken into consideration?  
On motion of Senator Gustafson, report placed on the Orders the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate.  
 John Macdonald ' s death 91 meant an extraordinary career which spanned those of eight Prime ministers .
 Prime eight those 91 Macdonald s extraordinary career which ministers spanned an meant of ' death at .
 John Macdonald death s which Prime at ministers an spanned those eight extraordinary of career . 91 meant
 91 death spanned . eight an extraordinary ministers Prime Macdonald s John ' of which meant those career
Princes and lords are but the breath of kings, 
 lords but , the Princes are kings and breath of
 Princes lords are of kings breath , the and but
 lords , but breath Princes of and the kings are
 the lords Princes , and breath but are kings of
 and but breath , of kings Princes the lords are
 lords are Princes , but kings of and the breath
 lords the , but are of breath Princes kings and
 are but lords breath and kings the , Princes of
 , are of breath the and kings lords but Princes
 breath lords of kings the , are Princes but and
 but breath lords , the kings of Princes are and
 breath Princes are lords kings the of and , but
 the of are Princes , kings lords breath and but
 , and the breath kings of Princes are but lords
 but kings Princes of breath , are and the lords
 Princes of the breath but lords and , are kings
For a pension fund, long-term investment performance is paramount.  
Changes to Canada Pension Plan-Investment Board Not Subject to Access to Information Act-Government Position 
(Response to question raised by Donald H. Oliver on November 19, 1997) 
Applying the Access to Information Act to the CPP Investment Board would be inappropriate.  
The Board's mandate is to invest CPP funds at arm's length from governments in the best interest of plan members. 
As an investment institution, much of its day-to-day activities will be commercially sensitive and would be exempt under ATI in any event.  
While ATI does not apply to the CPP Investment Board, by legislation and regulations the Board's operations will be very transparent and it will be subject to close public scrutiny.  
For example, the Board will be required to: 
- make public its investment policies, code of conduct, corporate governance practices, proxy voting guidelines, and by-laws 
- disclose the compensation of the five most highly compensated officers of the Board 
- prepare quarterly financial statements that will be sent to federal and provincial Finance Ministers, and an annual report that will be tabled in Parliament 
- hold regular public meetings in each participating province to allow for public discussion and input 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
Commemoration of Fiftieth Anniversary-Plans of Government 
(Response to question raised by Hon. Noël A. Kinsella on October 23, 1997) 
The 50th Anniversary provides Canadians an opportunity to reflect on the importance of human rights in the life of the country, as they are a fundamental unifying value and an important part of our legacy to future generations.  
The objectives of the commemoration are to promote respect for human rights and responsibilities; mark Canada's national and international progress in implementing human rights standards; develop innovative and responsive approaches to emerging human rights issues; and, to link values highly esteemed by Canadians - values such as respect for the rule of law, dignity of the person, fairness, equitable treatment and democratic participation - to a broader government agenda related to social cohesion and social justice.  
Activities planned around December 10, 1997 for the launch of the 50th Anniversary commemorative year of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) 
National Defence 
Lack of Helicopter for Number of Navy Frigates-Government Position 
 Princes and lords but the breath of kings ,
 Princes are kings lords but of breath the ,
 breath Princes but of kings , the are lords
 the are of breath kings but Princes lords and
Thus wrote Robert Burns. 
 Burns Robert . Thus wrote
 Burns Robert . Thus wrote
 Thus Burns Robert wrote .
 wrote Burns Robert Thus .
 Burns wrote Robert . Thus
 Burns Thus . wrote Robert
 wrote . Burns Robert Thus
 wrote Thus . Robert Burns
 . Robert Thus wrote Burns
 Burns . Robert wrote Thus
 Thus wrote Burns Robert .
 Thus Burns Robert wrote .
 Robert . wrote Burns Thus
 Robert Thus Burns . wrote
 Burns Robert Thus wrote .
 Burns Thus wrote . Robert
A History of the Vote in Canada is meant to be an educational resource and a reminder to Canadians of the significance of the right to vote. 
This is in keeping with Elections Canada's 1993 mandate to educate voters about the democratic right to vote.  
While this book will appeal to historians, political scientists, university and high school teachers and students, it is hoped that it will also reach those who may have difficulty exercising their right to vote.  
As parliamentarians, honourable senators, it is our role to help promote this book and educate our fellow citizens on their rights as voters.  
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
Report of Committee 
Hon. Ron Ghitter , Chair of the Standing Senate Committee on Energy, the Environment and Natural Resources, presented the following report: 
Tuesday, December 9, 1997 
The Standing Senate Committee on Energy, the Environment and Natural Resources has the honour to present its 
SECOND REPORT 
Respectfully submitted, 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this bill be read the third time?  
On motion of Senator Butts, bill placed on the Orders of the Day for third reading at the next sitting of the Senate.  
Income Tax Conventions Implementation Act, 1997 
Report of Committee 
Hon. Michael Kirby , Chairman of the Standing Senate Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce, presented the following report: 
Tuesday, December 9, 1997 
The Standing Senate Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce has the honour to present its 
SIXTH REPORT 
 wrote Robert Burns .
 . Thus wrote Robert
 Thus Robert . wrote
 . Thus wrote Burns
John M. was an honest, noble man, who served his party, his community, and the people of eastern Nova Scotia until the end. 
 community eastern people an was served his man of John who Scotia , . until . and , the Nova M honest end , noble the party his ,
 noble the his Nova and , of who people his end served Scotia honest the community an eastern party , . John . was M , until man ,
 served the , . was until end people honest community , Scotia , who Nova John man his the M an of noble party his and , . eastern
 the man John the , people served his Scotia . , was of , until noble , . community honest end party an M and his who Nova eastern
 community an and , M the people , , of his who John noble served end man was . eastern , Nova . his Scotia until the party honest
 served eastern party , , community . of John an . , his noble was people man the until Nova Scotia who end the his and M , honest
 man John , of . who . the Nova noble was the , end people Scotia community his his served until honest and , M party an eastern ,
 the served community man M honest eastern end until an Nova his , and noble , party Scotia the . , who of John . people was his ,
 Nova his the an John people , his served , . was community , and honest of . noble Scotia , until man M end eastern who the party
 who and . was , community of honest Scotia , M John Nova end . , noble his served people party an until eastern man the , the his
 end served M who his , until man John Scotia , his and , honest , the community eastern an was . noble Nova the people of party .
 honest people eastern man , M of served party , John an , , and Scotia community the end until noble his was the his . Nova . who
 . . party , and end man who John people , the community until an noble , was Scotia eastern served Nova his the his M , honest of
 . , . Nova Scotia , an man M end honest served eastern party his of John his and , until was the who noble the people , community
 eastern an people M of until and honest man , his served end . was Scotia , noble , community . John Nova , his party the who the
 and , community was end the until his people John an who his Scotia eastern the . . , man , party M Nova of served honest noble ,
Senator Kinsella :
Thank you, Senator Stewart.  
Perhaps I might address the Deputy Leader of the Government, then. 
By way of recapitulation, this issue is important for all honourable senators. 
A request for leave has been made by the Chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee to allow that committee to sit tomorrow, Wednesday, even though the Senate may then be sitting. 
The issue is that Wednesday, in our common understanding, was to be a short day to allow committees to sit on Wednesday afternoons.  
Not just today but at other times, Senator Stewart has brought to our attention the fact that committees operate on that assumption and arrange their business plans, only to be frustrated in executing their business plan by the Senate going way beyond 3:00 or 3:30 p.m. on Wednesday afternoons.  
Senator Stewart has explained to us that that is the main concern. 
He would like some assurance from the leadership on both sides that, on Wednesdays, we would try harder to respect that tradition. 
We on this side agree to make every effort to complete our work on Wednesday afternoons at around 3:00 or 3:15 p.m. If you can also agree, perhaps we do not need to have this motion.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, is leave granted?  
Senator Kinsella :
It depends upon the answer.  
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, we must make an effort to allow committees to sit. 
They do invite witnesses, many of whom come from out of town. 
We inconvenience them if we are not able to hear from them.  
I must congratulate senators on this side who have refrained, for the most part, from making Senators' Statements on Wednesdays, unless it was something quite urgent, as was Senator Kenny's statement today. 
They have tried to make their speeches on either Tuesdays or Thursdays. 
 John M . an honest , noble man , who served his party , his community , and the people of eastern Nova Scotia until the end .
 people party his M man Nova Scotia the and , John until . . served end who of noble the an his was eastern honest community , ,
 , people eastern , honest his Nova man who served an . his , end until party of Scotia M the , and the noble community was .
 of man served until an , end the John his , Nova was noble . who , party the community Scotia . honest and eastern , M his
He is now at rest in his beloved Cape Breton. 
 his Cape He at rest now in is . Breton beloved
 He in his is Breton rest . beloved Cape at now
 now He . is at in Cape his Breton beloved rest
 his beloved is in Breton at He now . Cape rest
 rest . now Breton Cape at his in beloved He is
 Breton now He at Cape rest . is his in beloved
 now his . at rest He Cape beloved Breton in is
 . now rest beloved in at is Breton his Cape He
 is in beloved at . now Breton rest his He Cape
 in at Cape now . Breton his He beloved is rest
 Breton Cape in now He is . beloved at his rest
 rest Breton is at beloved . now He his in Cape
 now He at is . in Breton rest beloved Cape his
 his at in rest is Cape beloved He now . Breton
 at . his Cape in beloved He now Breton rest is
 He is his now rest at in beloved Cape Breton .
Honourable senators, I regret to interrupt but the allotted 15 minutes has expired. 
Is leave granted for Senator Grafstein to continue?  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
Senator Grafstein :
Alliance Quebec, the foremost, mainstream English group, appeared at first to oppose section 93. 
However, on cross examination - and this is the value of the committee hearings - their interest was not so much in opposing section 93. 
Rather, their interest was focused on the failure of section 23(1)( a ) of the Charter to be proclaimed in Quebec. 
As Senator Lynch-Staunton put it so well, it means that there are in effect two classes in Quebec as it presently pertains. 
If you are English speaking and you come from outside of Canada, your children will be streamed by the Quebec government into the French-language stream. 
That is unfair. 
They are not without some type of relief and I will address that later.  
However, this is an issue of linguistic rights. 
Here the question is not of linguistic rights but denominational privileges.  
In cross-examining Alliance Quebec, it was clear that they did not oppose the amendments to section 93 but rather the enforcement of section 23(1)( a ). Section 23(1)( a ) requires a proclamation by the Province of Quebec, and a declaration of this proclamation is, of course, not within federal powers. 
We gave that up in 1982.  
Senator Pitfield knows this well. 
He was an architect of the Constitution Act, 1982. 
It is clearly within the four corners of the assembly of Quebec to proclaim, if it chooses, section 23(1)( a ). Many of us are unhappy with this aspect of section 23(1)( a ). Students in over 13,000 families have been precluded from entering the English stream because the Province of Quebec has refused to proclaim section 23(1)( a ). 
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
 He now at rest in his beloved Cape Breton .
 He Breton now Cape . is his beloved rest at
 He his . in at rest Cape beloved is Breton
 in rest beloved . is He at Cape Breton his
That is where his heart was; that is where it has always been, and that is why all of us who knew him so well still miss him so very much.  
 where and is is was his it who that us so of is ; much been him miss has all heart , that him knew always why well . still where very That so
 so still very always of him heart was who so that ; has much is us him That is that it where been and where , . well all why knew is miss his
 that been knew . heart of it ; That where still has and miss him who is always was very all where much why is so well , so that him his is us
 . where of where so is him his that much has still knew been that always why well is who us That , was it miss very and heart all ; so is him
 been miss ; has is so that , and still where very always where him all him so That is is heart much . it why us his was well that who knew of
 is him of it all very us where is , has where much miss why him knew heart ; that well still That is . and that so who his so always been was
 much him still . where him miss and was is heart knew why well been us so has who ; is , That all of very his that that where always is it so
 , his still . where that knew always and has much is all that him it was us well That been is miss him heart very where why of is who so so ;
 so his always . heart all him has where and that was him where so miss is is very why well been ; That much it us is who of still , that knew
 very miss us has always much is why been so it and That so , where knew all of that that him where is ; his well . heart him who is still was
 was is miss is where that heart his , where . of knew that always very all us That so been who much still so him him is and ; well has why it
 that where . knew it been so has is heart why was very all always that him well is us , his miss much and who still him That is where ; so of
 it where so his ; very was has is him of is , so us been miss him who always that . why much all knew still well that is where That and heart
 so much him was so very always why that . it has all is been heart us of ; is is well that and where That miss still , who his knew where him
 that always ; him so still is of miss knew and where been is , his him so heart all has much very where . well us why was who that That it is
 That it still where of is who has always ; so well miss , us all . is much heart very why was that knew him his and that where is him been so
In that respect, I support the report and the resolution.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
It was moved by the Honourable Senator Pépin, seconded by the Honourable Senator Lucier, that this report be adopted.  
Is it your pleasure, honourable senators, to adopt the motion?  
Motion agreed to and report adopted, on division.  
Quebec 
Linguistic School Boards-Motion to Amend Section 93 of Constitution-Debate Adjourned 
Hon. Fernand Robichaud , for Senator Graham, rose pursuant to notice of Thursday, October 2, 1997: 
Whereas the Government of Quebec has indicated that it intends to establish French and English linguistic school boards in Quebec; 
and whereas the National Assembly of Quebec has passed a resolution authorizing an amendment to the Constitution of Canada; 
and whereas the National Assembly of Quebec has reaffirmed the established rights of the English-speaking community of Quebec, specifically the right, in accordance with the law of Quebec, of members of that community to have their children receive their instruction in English language educational facilities that are under the management and control of that community and are financed through public funds; 
and whereas section 23 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms guarantees to citizens throughout Canada rights to minority language instruction and minority language educational facilities under the management and control of linguistic minorities and provided out of public funds; 
and whereas section 43 of the Constitution Act, 1982 provides that an amendment to the Constitution of Canada may be made by proclamation issued by the Governor General under the Great Seal of Canada where so authorized by resolutions of the Senate and House of Commons and of the legislative assembly of each province to which the amendment applies; 
now therefore the Senate resolves that an amendment to the Constitution of Canada be authorized to be made by proclamation issued by His Excellency the Governor General under the Great Seal of Canada in accordance with the schedule hereto.  
SCHEDULE 
AMENDMENT TO THE CONSTITUTION OF CANADA 
CONSTITUTION ACT, 1867 
The Constitution Act, 1867, is amended by adding, immediately after section 93, the following: 
"93A. 
Paragraphs (1) to (4) of section 93 do not apply to Quebec." 
 That where his heart was ; that is where it has always been , and that is why all of us who knew him so well still miss him so very much .
 it all his so is knew where very so is much him that that him always . and where ; still been has That well is was who of , why miss us
 . why so us very much is is him him who his was and so of all that always , heart is ; where has where still it That been well that miss
 was ; much is so been why all so his us is , heart has him who still of it where miss and that always . knew well that That is very where
Hon. John Lynch-Staunton (Leader of the Opposition) :
 of the Hon - John Opposition : ) Staunton Lynch Leader . (
 Lynch Staunton . : John ) Opposition of Hon Leader ( the -
 . ( John - Staunton Leader Opposition ) of Lynch Hon the :
 Hon - Staunton ( . the Leader : John ) Opposition of Lynch
 Staunton John Leader ( ) the - Lynch Opposition of : Hon .
 . - : Lynch Leader Hon Staunton ( ) Opposition John the of
 ) Staunton of . Opposition John Lynch the ( - : Hon Leader
 Lynch John . Leader - Hon Opposition Staunton : ) the ( of
 . Hon - John of : Staunton ( Lynch ) the Opposition Leader
 : - the of ) Lynch Staunton Leader Opposition John ( . Hon
 Staunton the : Hon Opposition ) of - ( . Lynch John Leader
 Hon ) ( the Opposition . Staunton Lynch Leader John of - :
 Staunton of the Opposition ) : Lynch - Hon . ( Leader John
 Hon Leader - of Staunton : . ) ( John the Lynch Opposition
 Staunton Opposition - ) of Lynch Hon the Leader . ( John :
 : Lynch . John of Hon Opposition the - Leader Staunton ( )
The law should provide that the administrators of the fund are responsible for ensuring contributors a reasonable pension, while providing them with the best return, that is, the safest and best return possible.  
Canada's economy represents about 2.5 per cent of the world economy. 
So it would be wise to permit the fund not only to diversify its investments in stocks and bonds but also to invest worldwide. 
Diversification of values, in a variety of instruments, in various sectors, in different countries and currencies is thus a measure of wisdom and judgement to be left to those in charge, who must, of course, be accountable for their actions.  
Honourable senators, it would be tempting for the administrators to act as investors on occasion by investing in all sorts of businesses with their judgement either arbitrary or verging on patronage. 
We have seen this in Quebec. 
There must be strict rules to prevent this sort of thing, if we want to avoid regrettable misuse.  
The matter of the pension plan's objectives is basic. 
In this respect, the legislation must be clear. 
The board must first and foremost look after the interests of the contributors whose income security depends on its performance to a large extent.  
The history of the Quebec Caisse de dépôt et placement warrants examination in this regard. 
In the mid-1960s, at the time it was set up, Mr. Lesage, the Premier of Quebec at the time, described it as an instrument of social security. 
He added, at the instigation of some, that it would also be an instrument of economic development, with the result that, little by little, the managers who were not sufficiently dynamic in the eyes of the directors were replaced. 
It was not Mr. Caouette's money, it was real bucks. 
The second director was also an experienced investment fund manager, but the government changed in Quebec, and we ended up with people who were more dynamic and who wanted to direct the economy. 
That is when it was decided that the people running the Caisse were not dynamic enough and had to be replaced. 
That was done. 
That is how a deputy minister of finance came to be the president of the Caisse de dépôt et placement du Québec at a time when Finance Minister Parizeau was a very influential member of the Lévesque cabinet. 
This led Quebec industry leaders and other stakeholders to raise all sorts of questions about the policy and management of the Caisse under his direction.  
You know the arbitrary risks inherent in choosing the companies in which the board can invest. 
 Hon . John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition )
 Opposition Leader . John Lynch ) of : ( Staunton the Hon
 Leader John ( of Opposition Staunton . - Hon the : Lynch
 Hon Opposition of : - ) Staunton ( the Lynch . Leader
When the tactic worked, he would sit back again, his hand on his cane, a twinkle in his eye, and on his face a wicked smile that would take in his regiment of friends on both sides of the chamber.  
 and sit chamber face again his a would cane on regiment the eye , that hand both of in , back in a friends wicked the When his smile he of tactic his on his take , . twinkle his sides would on , worked
 eye chamber his that his tactic the in a , , would again take sides sit on hand the on in . a of his on would of his regiment wicked and face he , twinkle both When friends cane worked back his smile ,
 back his regiment chamber his both , take face his in on on a sides hand . twinkle would smile on a that of he the in tactic worked cane the again his wicked , friends and of , would eye his When sit ,
 his twinkle would his worked friends he that face a again chamber sit cane , both his the in regiment on , wicked a would hand smile , on the of , his in take eye . sides When on of back tactic and his
 , of . and When both his on wicked smile a he face worked take his his his the friends regiment that twinkle sides of in cane eye sit would hand the would again on back tactic on in his , , a , chamber
 would the chamber on of in his twinkle . again on sides he back , take the would smile that his worked hand on , his tactic his a in , , eye regiment friends wicked face cane a both sit When and his of
 on would of sit both friends smile . the take face regiment would on his , wicked tactic his cane , his sides hand When he the again his back and a chamber in a , twinkle his on worked of that eye in ,
 wicked sit his face eye on When , cane . his on would of back a his worked smile friends regiment that in take a hand his again and , twinkle , the the in on chamber would his he sides both of , tactic
 that twinkle on of smile chamber friends hand tactic the When , , his regiment worked his , sit , take again of a the eye he would on his . sides both in cane a back face on in wicked his his would and
 his tactic that , of smile chamber on worked in on would a , in his friends the would hand of his sides on , wicked , and his cane the both his When twinkle regiment eye take a he back sit face again .
 , When would on take sit his chamber that hand would friends his sides again , and in a cane smile , a he of on twinkle the both in of , face back the his regiment . eye wicked tactic his his on worked
 worked When chamber his on friends back the would hand he his cane would of . , on , sit sides tactic a the and that a take , , twinkle eye again his in regiment wicked on smile his face his both in of
 back a his both on of and sit again smile tactic , his his cane in worked When the would eye he his take would his , . friends of wicked the that , on twinkle chamber a on in regiment hand sides , face
 back and friends chamber eye twinkle regiment the that again his on smile in sides sit he on his wicked in the a his , When on would his , , both worked of of tactic would face hand his a take , cane .
 twinkle a regiment a again in of in . , on tactic his would both his sides on wicked , of chamber his smile his the the eye and , that on take friends face hand sit worked , his he cane When would back
 of wicked and both his the , in on twinkle worked a take . smile regiment would on in cane friends tactic sides he , sit on eye , again chamber hand When of back would a face his the that , his his his
That is a misnomer.  
In essence, section 93 is a series of privileges rather than full rights. 
Clearly, this is not the case here. 
Section 93 has yet another substantial problem which further diminished and minimized one's ability to define the subsections as containing full rights. 
On its face, these privileges, or limited rights, pertain only to the geography of the city of Montreal and Quebec City at the date of Confederation and beyond, into the province, to the privileges or rights of dissentient Roman Catholic and Protestant denominational school boards.  
Therefore, it is so difficult for me to understand how the subsections of 93 can be considered full rights. 
They could be considered privileges for geographically defined and certain narrowly cast denominational groups.  
Notwithstanding this difficulty, I still considered we had a responsibility to examine whether these groups, said to be affected by these privileges or narrow rights or attenuated rights, agreed with their substitution - not their diminishment or removal - for the architecture of denominational access now afforded under the provisions of Quebec educational laws. 
I say "substitution" because, while the constitutional provisions were being attenuated, denominational rights had previously been incorporated in the Quebec Education Bill 109 and its predecessors leading to that bill. 
There is a clear, overwhelming consensus for citizens in the province of Quebec to maintain a form, some form, of denominational teaching within their school system architecture.  
It is equally clear that there was an overwhelming consensus with few dissents throughout every segment of Quebec for renovating the Quebec school system into two linguistic streams, two linguistic boards, English and French. 
There is no question whatsoever in my mind, based on the evidence that I heard.  
Now we come to the more difficult question confronting members of the committee - to determine if there was a "majority" of the so-called "minorities" affected or given these denominational privileges.  
Even here, we had difficulty in definition. 
Notwithstanding that, we still treated that majority as if it were a minority.  
I will not repeat Senator Stewart's questions yesterday about section 93 and its limited scope, but I commend all students of the Constitution to examine section 93 and see how even the subsections of section 93, in so far as that section pertains to the province of Quebec, are much narrower in its scope than is clearly understood or debated in this Senate chamber. 
I will not go into that aspect of this debate. 
It would take half an hour, but I would be pleased to do so privately with any senator who is interested.  
The evidence we heard was extensive, definitive and clear. 
Let me quickly review the committee's evidence that brought it to conclude that there was a strong majority of the so-called minorities affected.  
 the tactic worked , he would sit back again , his hand on his cane , a twinkle in his eye , and on his face a wicked smile that would take in his regiment of friends on both sides of the chamber .
 , of the a hand eye sides face . on , his regiment a both that on the sit back his , would his in wicked on chamber twinkle and tactic in , he smile When would of his cane worked his friends again
 , his a both , worked his chamber friends his twinkle eye take his he on . in in would back would again the and on tactic on a that sides hand regiment his cane When smile of , wicked face the sit ,
 again , in wicked regiment would his he friends and the When of back eye , take that a smile sides the face a on worked his his on in his twinkle both tactic on . his , of , would chamber hand sit
Diminutive he was, and hardly what you would call garrulous or persistent in argument. 
 garrulous argument . or would you Diminutive persistent was he hardly in call and what ,
 persistent Diminutive or garrulous hardly call , was argument . he and would you in what
 . argument persistent he , in you would hardly call and or garrulous was Diminutive what
 was hardly you garrulous and what or in Diminutive . persistent , call would he argument
 call , you . or he was argument hardly would garrulous what in and persistent Diminutive
 . and you or what hardly call persistent , garrulous Diminutive he in would was argument
 garrulous or Diminutive what he would you in and was , . hardly persistent call argument
 persistent garrulous or what was he Diminutive . would you in argument hardly call and ,
 persistent , hardly call you Diminutive argument in or and garrulous was what . he would
 would he . garrulous you in or argument and was persistent what , Diminutive call hardly
 was Diminutive garrulous call in he . , or persistent would you hardly argument and what
 Diminutive persistent would and argument , was call in or he what garrulous . you hardly
 . was hardly what argument would in or he persistent you Diminutive and , call garrulous
 Diminutive you . argument would in , persistent call or was he what garrulous and hardly
 what . was call Diminutive he would persistent argument garrulous or hardly , in you and
 would was , he hardly in Diminutive . call or argument you garrulous persistent what and
Read the transcript. 
If there is a dispute about evidence, rather than taking my word or that of the honourable senator opposite - with whom I do disagree - senators should read the transcript. 
The transcript will speak for itself.  
Senator Lavoie-Roux :
I think all senators would have wanted to read the transcript, but we did not have enough time.  
The minister appeared before the committee on November 4. I asked him if he felt that minorities would be as well protected by section 23 of the Charter as they were by section 93 of the Constitution, and he said that they would not be as well protected.  
Senator Grafstein :
He and I have a different viewpoint on section 23(1)( a ) of the Charter.  
Hon. Dalia Wood :
Honourable senators, I have a question for the honourable senator.  
I do not agree with the concept of my honourable friend's consensus. 
Le Fédération des comités des parents de la province de Québec is a group mandated by the National Assembly to represent all parents and all schools in Quebec. 
They appeared before the committee. 
The president, Mr. Gary Stronach, when asked if the membership was aware, stated - and this is in his letter - that he did not ask his membership for their views. 
He said that he did not ask the parents whether they were for or against the amendment to section 93.  
This is one of the largest groups in Quebec. 
If Mr. Stronach is part of the "for" or "against" theory, then there is a problem with the whole concept put forth by my honourable friend.  
My honourable friend spoke of the Estates General, but he did not refer to their minority report, which covered over 70 per cent of their membership. 
Why are my figures different from those of my honourable friend?  
Senator Grafstein :
 Diminutive he was , hardly what you would call garrulous or persistent in argument .
 hardly call you or , Diminutive garrulous and in would argument he was what .
 argument hardly . call or he in garrulous Diminutive was would what and , you
 garrulous and . or , argument hardly what was in would Diminutive he call you
Each of us might have described him differently. 
 Each him of differently might described have . us
 . described of have Each him might differently us
 him us of Each have might described . differently
 . described have us Each of differently him might
 have described differently . us him Each of might
 differently us him Each of might have described .
 him us of described have Each differently might .
 have . us might described differently Each of him
 him have Each us differently described of . might
 him have described of us . differently Each might
 differently him us described Each might of . have
 of have us him differently Each described might .
 us of differently might described . him Each have
 differently him might of us . described have Each
 Each differently us might . of described have him
 Each differently have might of described us . him
This concentration of power, this centralization will be unhealthy. 
This technocracy and its perverse effects make me nervous. 
I hope one day we will have nothing worse than Mr. Sorros' manoeuvres to criticize.  
The regulations governing investments and the behaviour of administrators have not been revealed. 
They are not ready. 
What guidelines will there be for administrators? 
A parliamentary review is therefore vital before their implementation.  
In concluding, I would say to the government that the preferable alternative to its bill would be to simply oblige everyone in the labour force in Canada to invest a percentage of their savings in funds under private management or let government assume its role by providing a safety net for those who could not set aside enough money for their old age.  
Here is an intelligent response to the challenge before us. 
However, and it is regrettable in this era of the welfare state, it seems to me that we prefer to make sweeping rules that apply to everyone in order to resolve the problem of a few.  
Hon. Philippe Deane Gigantès :
You talk with admiration of private investment management. 
How do you explain the disaster at Olympia & York, for example, under the management of Mr. Eyton, our colleague, and the fact that major players like Conrad Black closed Dominion Stores and took the money Dominion Stores employees had invested in a pension fund, a fund they never drew from? 
Are you telling us that the private sector will be more generous and wise than the Caisse de dépôt in Quebec? 
Senator Bolduc :
I did not say disasters did not happen in the private sector. 
Senator Gigantès :
It is not a big deal if you have $3 million, but it is if you lose $35,000 or $70,000 and this is all the money you have. 
It may not be a big deal for you, but it is for small investors.  
Senator Bolduc :
 Each of us might have described him differently
 us Each might of differently described . have
 differently of us Each described . have might
 might us have described him . Each differently
In return for high standards of service, fate was kind through his 91 years. 
 of for his kind was through years fate , In return high standards service 91 .
 high return , of standards was his 91 for through years service kind In fate .
 91 In was through years of his standards . high return service kind , fate for
 high , service . return was 91 fate standards for his of kind through years In
 for service , years through was 91 return fate In of standards his kind high .
 91 In years service through was return kind . , standards of his for high fate
 , In of for . return was years fate service 91 his high through standards kind
 standards his high return of service 91 kind . years fate for through , In was
 fate return years kind , his In high 91 service through of for standards was .
 years 91 kind through return fate . service of In standards , high his was for
 service his for through fate was return standards high , kind In of . 91 years
 high 91 for was service standards of fate , . kind his return In years through
 service , his 91 In high was years through of standards . kind return fate for
 , his through high 91 kind return fate In for . service years standards was of
 years 91 return his through . of was high , for service kind In fate standards
 his service for return was of high through kind , standards fate 91 years In .
The government's response to this fundamental question is obligatory collectivization. 
The government seems to assume that Canadians are irresponsible, ignorant, and improvident, and that big brother in Ottawa knows best.  
If he is so competent, what has this big brother been doing for 20 years? 
He agreed to give pension benefits to people, but forgot to levy what he needed to be able to do so, and what he levied, he loaned to the provinces at such low rates that, unless there are drastic changes, the plan will go bankrupt.  
Here we have a classic case of public mismanagement. 
On the one hand, they hand out goodies and, on the other, they forget to charge for them. 
And now they have learned nothing from this sad tale:
Ottawa is asking for even more from everyone and tells us that this time it will invest the money wisely and that it will be for the future good of all.  
Honourable senators, I would much more prefer looking after my own retirement, and I know many Canadians who would like to be free to do what they want with their own money.  
There are many other aspects of this bill that require serious consideration, but I will deal here with only one or two.  
The bill provides for the creation of a government agency responsible for investing the funds collected from contributors to the Canada Pension Plan.  
This agency will have more or less the same powers as the Caisse de dépôt du Québec. 
The management of these funds will therefore be given to a government monopoly, as was done with the generation and distribution of electricity.  
However, how can the performance of a monopoly be assessed? 
And do you know of any monopoly where unacceptable mismanagement did not occur at one time or another? 
There is a long list of unfortunate cases of poor management - we have all heard stories of the extravagant expense accounts of people in the public sector who think they own the jobs they are holding - of bad investments, such as those made in real estate by an agency like the one we are creating, for example, of consumer gouging - we have seen monopolies charge excessive rates, because they were the only ones providing the service - of unreasonable benefits, such as complete job security for employees at the expense of the taxpayer - as has occurred in crown corporations you are familiar with - of differences in economic and social objectives - this also happened when an agency was created and given a mandate, and then after 15 years, it started doing something else, we have all seen this - of conflicts of interest involving officials who make no difference between their personal interest and that of the public, et cetera.  
There is a long list of horror stories involving monopolies. 
The whole history of the public sector, here and elsewhere, is full of such unfortunate incidents. 
I will not speak here about what occurred in Eastern Europe or in the Communist Bloc. 
But in this country and in countries like France and England, such cases have been a constant feature of the past 15 or 20 years.  
 In return for high standards service , fate was kind through his 91 years .
 return was fate kind In standards his . for , 91 of through years high
 return years through his was 91 of kind for In service , fate . high
 for standards years of In . return high was kind 91 , through service his
When I paid tribute to him here on the occasion of his 90th birthday, I chose my words carefully when I said that: 
 that my chose of occasion here the tribute I carefully : when , I birthday paid his him I words When said to on 90th
 I I to words him when When carefully birthday on : said my that occasion 90th the I here of his paid , chose tribute
 words 90th I that to on when here my , tribute occasion When birthday the chose his paid I him said I : of carefully
 said him birthday here , to that paid tribute 90th on occasion I carefully When when the of I chose words : I his my
 said him that birthday tribute his , I 90th chose my the I When I : carefully occasion to words paid here of on when
 said here that carefully his When I occasion paid to chose I 90th : , him the birthday when of tribute I words on my
 , chose him here when occasion 90th birthday I on the carefully I words his of tribute said I paid that my When to :
 him : on that paid 90th said I carefully the my I I chose birthday when words his to When occasion , here tribute of
 birthday that words 90th on to occasion his said I carefully I here When the I my of : tribute paid , him when chose
 90th him here tribute my When , that birthday chose occasion of : his I to paid I carefully on the words when said I
 the here paid I him I When words occasion chose , his when said on to that I birthday of 90th my carefully : tribute
 carefully tribute birthday I that I him my of the words I said paid to When on 90th his , chose here : occasion when
 of that I chose on birthday : to when I my paid said occasion tribute words 90th , him here his I carefully the When
 : when I , carefully his to said 90th chose here him I occasion birthday I the of that tribute When my paid words on
 of carefully occasion here tribute on said birthday I when words When 90th the him : , my I chose his that I to paid
 on 90th When paid here said words the to carefully occasion tribute I birthday : I when that him I , my chose his of
The minister's comments do not have nearly the same impact after three years.  
I am not saying everything is managed perfectly in the private sector, but I will tell you that it is the people's own money. 
It is not public money. 
No one is forced to invest in Royal Trust.  
Senator Gigantès :
The public is made up of individuals. 
These individuals are private persons. 
Under the proposed system, they would invest in something which may not make huge profits, but which will not experience the disasters of the private sector.  
Senator Bolduc :
It is a matter of choice. 
Senator Gigantès :
With a system such as the one proposed, one thing is for sure. 
There will be no Trevor Eyton to squander the money, there will be no Conrad Black or Olympia & York to take it away from you.  
Senator Bolduc :
I do not want to answer questions on specific cases, because I find it objectionable.  
Hon. Gerry St. Germain :
Honourable senators, the honourable senator who has just spoken brings a wealth of experience to this chamber. 
He was one of the top bureaucrats and one of the top men in the Quebec government at one time. 
He brings that experience to this forum.  
I would prefer to ask this question of the government side, but no one will speak further on it. 
 When I paid tribute to him here on the occasion of his 90th birthday , I chose my words carefully when I said :
 my paid tribute of birthday 90th I his said when him chose carefully I , I to here the on words : occasion that
 on him that chose I : here to said when my of words 90th his birthday paid tribute , I When occasion the I
 carefully birthday tribute : when here said his paid 90th him of on that I to occasion I , my chose words the When
In his reply to these comments and to those kind ones made by Senator Fairbairn as Leader of the Government - she called him a true example of excellence and dedication - he said very snappily: 
 excellence to - as Senator she comments Leader and made snappily said a those reply very these true the he : by called In of - kind to dedication example Fairbairn him of his and Government ones
 the Government - example to very Leader to a dedication he those of ones kind Senator made called true by comments said - and of as Fairbairn reply his these and she excellence snappily : him In
 ones excellence and she - In these comments : and of true to Fairbairn Leader example called of reply to the snappily - as those made he very him Senator by dedication said his Government kind a
 a true she Fairbairn ones dedication snappily said the his - very to he Senator reply to of as by and In excellence made these : Leader of called example - and kind comments those him Government
 the a - those Senator Government of excellence and of comments dedication : In Leader kind reply Fairbairn said to made these by she - very true to called ones example him snappily he as his and
 excellence said and by - a his she dedication very those : made - as Senator ones to of comments In these Fairbairn reply the Government him of he kind snappily example Leader called and true to
 he ones Government as the to dedication by made called - kind to of comments : snappily his excellence Fairbairn - and she these those true said Senator a him and of Leader In reply example very
 called - true comments the these she of those Government as and he example dedication to excellence by to Fairbairn snappily and Leader of reply kind Senator - ones very his : him a said made In
 to reply In the of he as and - and - Senator Leader these those true him ones comments kind his said called Fairbairn snappily made to she of dedication example Government very a : by excellence
 said and as Leader and a snappily reply the very In he by - to to kind those Government she him dedication : excellence Senator ones comments called of Fairbairn example these - of made his true
 the said he Senator Leader made and a In she example ones and - to of dedication - kind Fairbairn those reply comments Government called excellence his these by snappily very : true him to as of
 called In of dedication made true : she him kind comments very to Fairbairn - reply those example ones Leader excellence as his by Senator and he Government to snappily a of and the these - said
 very said to reply as a him his of - he to and In kind : ones these Fairbairn and dedication Government excellence the true - snappily of example Leader those comments she called made by Senator
 Senator to Government he his dedication example : she Leader comments as those him and excellence to and said Fairbairn In true very these reply - made snappily called ones kind the of of - by a
 those a Fairbairn as true excellence kind these to : of by his he called very In dedication the reply Leader him - made Government she to example and of Senator said ones - snappily and comments
 ones Leader - said Senator reply of dedication comments a snappily of made true excellence and Fairbairn these the she : by his - and In those called to example very Government him as to he kind
Since 1973, they have been making new legislation and implementing new programs. 
Why will they not use the fund that will accumulate on the other side, over which Parliament has no control? 
We saw this stuff today when we were studying the Estimates. 
The government has said that we did it, as Tories. 
However, the Liberals were in power a lot longer, so they are much more responsible.  
Retirement and earnings tests for individuals were eliminated in 1974. 
Benefits were provided to male and female contributors, to surviving spouses and dependent children. 
However, instead of taking it out of general revenue, the government took it out of the CPP because, in the old days, there was lots of money in that fund. 
There were not as many old people. 
There was a great number of working people, and lots of cash. 
They said, "We can throw it around." 
No one was thinking what would happen when people in the large demographic group turned 65.  
The amendments provided for the elimination of CPP children's benefits which previously applied - they changed it again - where more than four children of a deceased or disabled contributor had been eligible for such benefits. 
Now, if you have more than four kids, that is fine, too. 
However, it was another increased cost to what should be a pension plan. 
The government should have taken the money out of something else, or increased the amount of CPP premiums so that people were told the truth, and also told, "To pay for this it will cost you 10 cents or 20 cents more a month." 
The cash was there, so they used that cash.  
Legislation was enacted for spousal credits. 
When people get divorced, they have to keep up with the times. 
They can split the benefits. 
 In his reply to these comments and to those kind ones made by Senator Fairbairn as Leader of the Government - she called him a true example of excellence and dedication - he very snappily :
 to comments very ones kind snappily Senator In excellence those of dedication by example true she Government these and said his the called as made and him : - Fairbairn reply to of he - a
 to Senator true his these those dedication he reply said Government - excellence ones she example In : of by - and called comments as of Leader kind very and to a made him Fairbairn the
 Leader dedication very kind Senator these called by made Fairbairn and ones reply true comments a said - to snappily to those as In she : - Government the example of him he excellence of his
The trouble is that after a while you get to believe it yourself.  
 to you a The . is yourself trouble get that while after it believe
 believe to that is get . after trouble it a yourself while you The
 you to The while a after . that trouble believe yourself is it get
 is to you . that yourself get trouble while The believe it after a
 trouble while get is you after The that . to a yourself it believe
 after while to get you that trouble it believe is The a yourself .
 after you . get believe a yourself it to while is The trouble that
 yourself to after The that believe . a while trouble you is it get
 it to trouble a get you while believe that is . after yourself The
 it that The after believe to get is . you trouble a yourself while
 is get that yourself a believe after you while to . The it trouble
 . a believe is get it while trouble to you yourself The that after
 believe . get a while after you yourself is trouble The that it to
 a trouble after yourself get while is that to The you it . believe
 after a yourself trouble that get believe The . while it is to you
 you while is that after to believe yourself a trouble it . The get
What would the honourable senator do in the area of communication for those in isolated settlements regarding private pension plans? 
There are no words in Cree or michif for "private pension plan."  
I was a member of the working poor in 1965 and 1966 when this plan was put into force. 
I did not agree with the Canada Pension Plan. 
However, I will guarantee honourable senators right now that I totally agree with deductions being made, because now at least I have a pension.  
What will happen if this plan goes through is that the people in this country who really need it will get it. 
They have to travel 240 kilometres to the closest bank. 
Many do not speak English. 
What would you do in this case for these people who have nothing?  
Some Hon. Senators :
Hear, hear!  
Senator Stratton :
I thank the honourable senator for her question. 
It was an excellent question, and it is one that she should ask of the government. 
She should ask the government what they are doing to communicate the changes to our pension plan system as a whole.  
Senator Chalifoux :
I am asking you.  
Senator Stratton :
First, because of the $600-billion debt that the pension plan has, I do not think that we can privatize it at this time. 
I do not think the people the honourable senator talked about, and the people of my generation, are prepared enough financially to make that transition. 
 The trouble is that after a while you get believe it yourself .
 is while . to yourself trouble that a after get it you believe
 a after you . to believe is get trouble The it that while
 after while is believe it . you to that trouble The get a
He continued: 
 : He continued
 He continued :
 continued : He
 He : continued
 continued He :
 continued He :
 : He continued
 He continued :
 continued He :
 He continued :
 continued He :
 He : continued
 : He continued
 : continued He
 He continued :
 : He continued
It is my interpretation that they still possess that authority. 
It is not enshrined in the Criminal Code. 
It is one of those principles that came into our law from the British system. 
As Senator Cools pointed out, no statute was broken. 
Therefore, the federal requirement that all federal laws must comply with the Charter of Rights and Freedoms was not affected.  
Yesterday, Senator Beaudoin was explaining the different parts of the Constitution, the British North America Act of 1867, the Charter of Rights, and so on. 
At times, it appears the Supreme Court of Canada considers that the Constitution consists only of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 
Despite all the evidence - the stolen truck, the blood on the accused - the judges were only interested in one thing, and that was the arrest warrant. 
There was no warrant because the police acted on the spot when they had the accused, and I think they acted quite properly.  
Honourable senators, the Supreme Court ignored the rights of Mr. Boyle. 
Section 7 of the Charter indicates that Mr. Boyle had the right to life, privacy and security of the person, and those rights were not to be taken from him except by and in accordance with the principles of fundamental justice.  
I think the justices of the Supreme Court of Canada should be sent a message reminding them that the victim also had rights under the Charter.  
In all fairness, honourable senators, I must say that three of the justices dissented with the majority decision. 
They felt the police action had no bearing or outcome on the decision. 
The chief justice came down the middle and quoted the decision made by former chief justice Brian Dickson, which I understand finds that, if the subject is not spelled out in the Constitution, it is implied as being there. 
However, there again, that is merely my interpretation.  
I emphasize again that Mr. Boyle had the right to his life. 
He had the right to have a vehicle and operate it, and he had the right to have money in his possession. 
All those were taken away from him, and all the Supreme Court of Canada could think of was that piece of paper called a "warrant" and to criticize the police for not having such a document.  
I wanted to suggest that perhaps criminals should apply for a warrant before they commit murder, but I do not want to pursue that because I am afraid that some Charter judge will give them a warrant or a licence to do so. 
 He continued
 He :
 He :
 He continued
I must say it took me a long time to get a mention on the front page of the Cape Breton Post , but I finally made it after 90 years.  
 Post page . a years 90 it the after I a finally it must but front get long Breton say I time me , Cape to the made of took mention on
 made but me on front get time . , I 90 the of I must Cape a to page Post long the it a say after it Breton took years mention finally
 the finally it I get page the after I on of a Post Cape long but Breton say 90 time it made , a me took must to years mention . front
 made on me a it Cape front years I a Post I but took after time page say get mention finally to , the Breton long the of it 90 . must
 but took of made on finally I front after the , the Breton time must . get I Post a it 90 mention page years long a to say Cape me it
 long mention Post a but took made a years after , to on say me the it I must it Breton the 90 time get of finally front I Cape . page
 90 a to front mention finally but long get on made time took I a , it after Breton years . it Post the must I page of say the Cape me
 a to say Cape years Breton long the after took it a finally Post I get of me . it made the time 90 , on front page must I but mention
 get made Breton Post but must 90 me finally a a say on the after page years of it time , to the mention long I took front . I Cape it
 years must after I but Cape me made I front time 90 , mention took to page Breton it the a a of long finally the it say on Post . get
 on I after long time mention get . say of took I it , finally a the Cape but Post it a me must Breton made to the years 90 page front
 page took mention Breton I I after . the Post years the , but on time a a it front Cape 90 to say must of get made me finally long it
 after a I must get the Cape Post me but a , front page . of to the it long 90 Breton mention finally say made on it years I took time
 years front get , . it 90 say mention Cape after I a made it finally to took I the page time a must on but long of Post Breton the me
 front say Breton took page me years but , Post 90 on after the long finally a time a get it made must . Cape I mention it to of the I
 finally mention me a after , . Post say it 90 I took years but Cape get page time I front it Breton the a on to must of long made the
A moment ago I said that when a government agency, a public office, is created, there is a risk of politicizing the process.  
Participation in business, with such enormous amounts, cannot be limited to a few major companies - the Canadian market is not all that big - but will also extend to a multitude of medium-sized businesses. 
The available funding will be sufficient to invest in hundreds of medium-sized businesses. 
In Quebec, for example, if I remember correctly from its last report, the Caisse de dépôt already invests in almost 800 Quebec businesses.  
Now, how are these 800 to be selected and monitored? 
There is likely to be arbitrariness and patronage.  
In addition, the Board will be everywhere and inevitably set conditions. 
Businesses will have to toe the line as the provinces do when Ottawa doles out conditional funding, as you may recall. 
This concentration of power, this centralization will be unhealthy. 
This technocracy and its perverse effects make me nervous. 
I hope one day we will have nothing worse than Mr. Sorros' manoeuvres to criticize.  
The regulations governing investments and the behaviour of administrators have not been revealed. 
They are not ready. 
What guidelines will there be for administrators? 
A parliamentary review is therefore vital before their implementation.  
In concluding, I would say to the government that the preferable alternative to its bill would be to simply oblige everyone in the labour force in Canada to invest a percentage of their savings in funds under private management or let government assume its role by providing a safety net for those who could not set aside enough money for their old age.  
Here is an intelligent response to the challenge before us. 
However, and it is regrettable in this era of the welfare state, it seems to me that we prefer to make sweeping rules that apply to everyone in order to resolve the problem of a few.  
Hon. Philippe Deane Gigantès :
You talk with admiration of private investment management. 
 I must say it took me a long time to get a mention on the front page of the Cape Breton Post , but finally made it after 90 years .
 to long years . get after time of finally page it the me Breton made must I say front Cape 90 , the took it I on but a mention Post
 took . a of mention must Cape on I long it years to time Breton get it finally the 90 me made I say , after Post a front the but
 must it took years page a the on long I . made me Cape to of after 90 but Breton Post get finally , mention the I say it front time
John Michael Macdonald was born in North Sydney, the son of a Nova Scotia cabinet minister. 
 . the born son , Michael Scotia a was North cabinet minister Macdonald of John Sydney Nova in
 John Scotia Michael , . of in was Sydney Nova Macdonald the cabinet a son born North minister
 Sydney . North , John Scotia cabinet Michael born was minister the in Macdonald of son Nova a
 of cabinet minister Sydney Macdonald Scotia a North born , . the son Nova was in Michael John
 Macdonald in cabinet John the Michael Sydney , Nova of Scotia minister born North son was a .
 . Macdonald in cabinet born a of Sydney Scotia Nova North was the son , John Michael minister
 minister North Scotia born of Michael son in Nova Macdonald was a John the Sydney , . cabinet
 Macdonald of was North Michael Scotia a Nova . the son , John in born Sydney cabinet minister
 son Scotia . was Macdonald cabinet Nova John a of , in minister Sydney born North the Michael
 a . was cabinet Sydney Scotia born North Macdonald of minister the son John , Nova Michael in
 the , of cabinet . born John a Sydney son North minister Macdonald Michael Scotia in Nova was
 North Sydney was , cabinet John son Scotia of born . minister Nova in Michael a the Macdonald
 North minister Nova son John in born a Michael . cabinet Sydney of Macdonald the Scotia was ,
 of cabinet . born minister , Scotia Nova a in the North son Macdonald John Sydney Michael was
 Macdonald Nova minister in of son . Sydney the John , cabinet a Michael was North Scotia born
 North born Macdonald was . in Sydney son cabinet Michael , Nova John minister the of Scotia a
Telecommunications Act Teleglobe Canada Reorganization and Divestiture Act 
Bill to Amend-First Reading 
The Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C-17, to amend the Telecommunications Act and the Teleglobe Canada Reorganization and Divestiture Act. 
Bill read first time.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this bill be read the second time?  
On motion of Senator Carstairs, bill placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading on Thursday, December 11, 1997.  
Canada Marine Bill 
First Reading 
The Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C-9, for making the system of Canadian ports competitive, efficient and commercially oriented, providing for the establishing of port authorities and the divesting of certain harbours and ports, for the commercialization of the St. Lawrence Seaway and ferry services and other matters related to maritime trade and transport and amending the Pilotage Act and amending and repealing other Acts as a consequence.  
Bill read first time.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this bill be read the second time?  
On motion of Senator Carstairs, bill placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading on Thursday, December 11, 1997.  
Aboriginal Peoples 
Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples-Committee Authorized to Study Recommendations 
Hon. Charlie Watt , pursuant to notice of December 8, 1997, moved: 
That the Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal Peoples be authorized to examine and report upon the recommendations of the Royal Commission Report on Aboriginal Peoples (Sessional paper 2/35-508.) 
respecting Aboriginal governance and, in particular, seek the comments of Aboriginal peoples and of other interested parties on: 
2. the mechanisms of implementing such new structural relationships and; 
 John Michael Macdonald was born in North Sydney , the son of a Nova cabinet minister .
 born North John son minister Macdonald in cabinet of a the Nova , Scotia Michael Sydney .
 . of born cabinet a North Michael , Nova son the Macdonald Sydney Scotia was John minister
 Sydney minister Michael of was , . John North in son cabinet Scotia Nova the born a
When he became Conservative whip here, Government Leader Duff Roblin remarked: 
 Government , he : became remarked Roblin whip Conservative Duff When here Leader
 , Roblin : he Government whip remarked Conservative became here Duff When Leader
 : here whip he Leader Roblin Duff became Government remarked , Conservative When
 became When Duff Leader whip Conservative Government here he Roblin remarked : ,
 When Leader he : whip Conservative Duff here Government remarked , became Roblin
 here he When became Duff whip Conservative : Roblin Leader Government , remarked
 Roblin here whip Government Leader When , : remarked he Duff became Conservative
 here Leader he Conservative , Roblin Duff became Government When whip remarked :
 , Leader Roblin : Duff When Government became Conservative whip here he remarked
 here Leader Roblin he When : , became Government remarked whip Conservative Duff
 Roblin : When here whip Government became he , Conservative Duff Leader remarked
 , here : he Government When remarked Conservative whip Roblin Leader became Duff
 , Roblin When he whip Leader Government here Conservative : remarked became Duff
 When , became : Roblin Conservative whip here he Government Duff remarked Leader
 whip Leader Government When remarked here , became Conservative : Duff Roblin he
 here Conservative Duff When Leader Government Roblin became , : he remarked whip
Search and Rescue Helicopter Replacement Program-Possible Cabinet Discussion on Awarding Contract for Helicopter Purchase-Government Position 
Search and Rescue Helicopter Replacement Program-State of Sea King Helicopter Fleet-Government Position 
Federal-Provincial Relations 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Atlantic Provinces Equal to Increase in Social Transfers-Government Position 
Delayed Answers to Oral Questions 
Human Resources Development 
Changes to Canada Pension Plan-Accountability and Transparency of Investment Board-Undertaking to Publish Quarterly Financial Statements-Government Position 
Changes to Canada Pension Plan-Investment Board Not Subject to Access to Information Act-Government Position 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
Commemoration of Fiftieth Anniversary-Plans of Government 
Activities planned around December 10, 1997 for the launch of the 50th Anniversary commemorative year of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) 
National Defence 
Lack of Helicopter for Number of Navy Frigates-Government Position 
Forestry 
Demolition of Government Laboratories-Possibility of Restoration of Funding-Government Position 
Answers to Order Paper Questions Tabled 
Energy-Department of the Environment-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Energy-Department of Justice-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Energy-Department of Multiculturalism-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Energy-Department of Natural Resources-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
 When he became Conservative whip , Government Leader Duff Roblin remarked :
 Government Leader remarked here : Roblin When Conservative became whip Duff he
 Conservative here When , he remarked whip : Roblin Leader Duff became
 : When Duff here Government remarked became Leader he Conservative whip Roblin
He exemplifies the art of party management brought to its best degree. 
 party art . brought management degree He the best exemplifies of to its
 exemplifies the degree He best . party to art management brought its of
 art its best the exemplifies . brought of to degree management party He
 to best art its the exemplifies of brought degree He management . party
 management to brought He degree party art of exemplifies . best its the
 He exemplifies best management degree to the its . party art of brought
 art exemplifies brought party He to its the . best degree management of
 brought party He management the degree art exemplifies to best its of .
 art brought He its management . exemplifies degree the to best of party
 party management brought of He the art to degree its exemplifies best .
 of the degree to art He best brought exemplifies management its party .
 its brought He management to the party of degree exemplifies best . art
 its art management He exemplifies party brought the . degree best to of
 management brought of to He exemplifies the . best its party art degree
 the degree exemplifies art brought party He of to . its management best
 brought . its best art degree to party of exemplifies the management He
My understanding is that these aircraft are at sea, and a number of them are engaged in some training exercises. 
Were we criticized for not being able to live up to our obligations?  
Senator Graham :
Not to my knowledge. 
It is my understanding that those helicopters are at sea on exercises. 
As to precisely where they are, on whatever ocean, I cannot positively say. 
It might be a military secret, as a matter of fact.  
Federal-Provincial Relations 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Atlantic Provinces Equal to Increase in Social Transfers-Government Position 
Hon. Brenda M. Robertson :
Honourable senators, I have a supplementary that goes back to questions raised by the Honourable Senator DeWare. 
I will come back to this again tomorrow and the next day.  
I should like to know from the Leader of the Government in the Senate whether the cuts we discussed yesterday in the social transfer payments for Atlantic Canada represent the increases in the social transfers that were announced twice previously by this government? 
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
No, not that I am aware, but it is an interesting question. 
I will bring forth an answer.  
Delayed Answers to Oral Questions 
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, I have a response to a question raised in the Senate on November 25, 1997, by the Honourable Senator Oliver regarding changes to the Canada Pension Plan and the Investment Board; a response to a question raised in the Senate on November 19, 1997, by the Honourable Senator Oliver regarding the Investment Board not being subject to Access to Information; a response to a question raised in the Senate on October 23, 1997, by the Honourable Senator Kinsella regarding commemoration of the 50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights; a response to a question raised in the Senate on November 20, 1997, by the Honourable Senator Forrestall regarding the lack of helicopters for a number of navy frigates; and a response to a question raised in the Senate on November 20, 1997, by the Honourable Senator Spivak regarding the demolition of government laboratories and the possibility of a restoration of funding.  
Human Resources Development 
 He exemplifies the art of party management brought to best degree .
 the its exemplifies best of art brought He party degree . management
 brought the . degree management best of party to He exemplifies art
 He its best the . brought degree exemplifies party to of art
He is one of those men blessed with the gift of succinct expression.  
 of He of those . succinct expression one is gift men blessed the with
 of succinct blessed He expression is one the those . of gift with men
 is blessed expression with He the of . of those one succinct men gift
 men . the of gift those with He blessed expression succinct one of is
 He of succinct blessed men one with the . those gift is of expression
 succinct with of blessed those He . one of men the is gift expression
 He succinct the . men of is with of those expression blessed one gift
 of expression . the is men with He succinct those gift blessed of one
 one gift with those expression is the of blessed . of succinct men He
 one those the blessed He . with gift expression is of men of succinct
 those with . is blessed expression men the He succinct gift of one of
 blessed is one gift of expression men of He succinct those with the .
 with is men . gift He blessed of those the one of succinct expression
 those of is gift expression succinct one of with He . the blessed men
 is He of of blessed one men . the succinct those with gift expression
 of is with gift the men of blessed He expression succinct one those .
Honourable senators, I strongly urge you to support this resolution. 
Although we noted there was a consensus to amend section 93, we felt the real issue was the quality of the education of children in Quebec, and on that point opinion was unanimous.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Senator Robichaud, allow me to correct an impression that you left and to ask you a question. 
However, I wanted to make this correction, because you referred to the "government in place", when in fact it was the Liberal government of the day that made the decision, over the objections of the Parti Québécois then in opposition.  
I am asking you the same question I asked Senator Grafstein, but to which I did not get an answer. 
Why is it so important to exempt Quebec from section 93 to allow it to reform its school system? 
What is the connection between the two?  
Senator Robichaud :
Let me give you my version of the facts. 
When we heard witnesses from Quebec, including school board officials, parents and teachers, some of them told us that, in its present form, section 93 brings about a superimposition of structures, particularly in the Montreal region. 
These people told us that this was preventing authorities from providing the best possible services. 
These people also told us they wanted the resolution to be passed before the end of the year so they could start long-term planning. 
They would really appreciate having some time to implement these changes.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
I do not want to unduly prolong the debate, but I have another question for Senator Robichaud. 
Since we did not get answers to certain questions, would you agree to invite the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs, who is the sponsor of this resolution, to appear before the Senate in committee of the whole? 
We would like him to give us certain assurances before we make a decision on this issue?  
Senator Robichaud :
Honourable senators, the minister who is the sponsor of the resolution has already appeared before the joint committee. 
 He is one of those blessed with the gift of succinct expression .
 expression one the of men those succinct of He gift is . with
 blessed the those of is succinct of . with expression men one He
 succinct one gift is . blessed those with the He men expression of
The file of John M.'s speeches is a running commentary on the great events and political vexations that roused Canadian concerns in a long public career, which John M. topped with his final labours as the last of the lifers in the Senate. 
 a s M is and political commentary file roused John Senate John . concerns as the with of , the the .' on which career in The running M final speeches long his vexations a public lifers great events that in the topped labours Canadian . last of
 Senate great last that his public The running John and which career political the roused , as a vexations speeches the John events s commentary M of .' on . long topped with the lifers in M of a concerns in the is labours Canadian final file .
 roused The final long . speeches is of lifers John running events political great M career with labours file s that vexations on last the as the John a a Senate , the Canadian which . his topped in concerns and of commentary M in the public .'
 s commentary the a and final The John file , is topped on speeches as lifers of Canadian great of long events the political concerns a . that last .' his running John public career M the with M in which Senate the labours vexations roused . in
 . public Senate a a the .' with and running long political John lifers labours which in on vexations speeches . topped s in is last as events M The of the of M file his Canadian the , John commentary great career the concerns final roused that
 concerns public of as running events a . commentary s the that which and is last the vexations long final roused lifers great . The the labours with the in Senate John file John of Canadian his topped , .' on a M M speeches political career in
 the vexations the running in public commentary roused concerns labours file s on a Senate .' events of with a political his M final John that . M is in last The of the John the great . which long career lifers and topped Canadian , as speeches
 labours as lifers the a his running final commentary and , speeches The John a last which M with long of M topped events the Canadian John in on vexations . . is great political Senate roused public .' concerns in s of the file that the career
 . file which of roused M his the , final in and labours of concerns lifers commentary running the long events the that vexations John is with The political a speeches as last in M on . s the Canadian career Senate public a topped John great .'
 . great Senate file John The .' of M last a long in as political speeches career John that lifers running the of concerns topped and vexations his is events M which public the labours final with roused , on the Canadian s . a commentary the in
 events on Canadian political . the topped running last the concerns as his Senate is M with a . John file of vexations public .' M final great roused which career that long in the of and the a commentary lifers John , s speeches in labours The
 the political of great concerns John of running the with the last and .' topped that . final commentary M file M long the The Canadian on Senate in John events roused career public as lifers , speeches in . a which his labours is vexations s a
 long a which last that in political topped Canadian public The his concerns the John . commentary lifers John M speeches on labours running of of the a final as is with and the in s great . , roused Senate career vexations .' file M the events
 roused of final s lifers M with of John Canadian events , is that the labours vexations long . a speeches his John file commentary last and The concerns career running .' the in which a M as on the the . great in public topped Senate political
 The . speeches . which final events on the in his the Senate is M career s public .' and Canadian file of running with the political topped vexations great as , John that M labours a commentary roused concerns in John long the last a lifers of
 Canadian the labours the a in his , Senate the a lifers John file John . on career the M in roused M with running and final . topped .' of events that as great political of which is concerns public vexations s The long last speeches commentary
In fact, the government is raising the cash floor from $11 billion to $12.5 billion, the single largest reinvestment made by the federal government. 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Provinces-Effect on Atlantic Provinces 
Hon. Mabel M. DeWare :
Honourable senators, my figures show that, four years ago, the provinces received more than $19 billion in cash transfers for health, education and welfare through what was then known as the Canadian Assistance Program and Established Programs Financing. 
The government's math provides some good news, as the original plan was to give them even less.  
The problem is that some provinces will get less under the new scheme while others will get more. 
Indeed, seven of the ten provinces will actually see their cash transfers fall even further, including all of Atlantic Canada.  
The cash transfer to Nova Scotia will fall from $427 million to $411 million, which is a difference of $16 million. 
The transfer for Prince Edward Island will fall from $60 million to $59 million, which is a reduction of $1 million. 
The cash transfer to Newfoundland will fall from $281 million to $251 million, which is a difference of $30 million. 
New Brunswick will lose $11 million. 
The total loss to the Atlantic provinces is $58 million.  
At the same time, three provinces, Ontario, Alberta and British Columbia will see their cash payments actually rise. 
Atlantic Canada's loss is their gain.  
Can the Leader of the Government tell us if his government believes that it is fair to ask the provinces that can least afford it to continue to receive less money year after year by way of support for health, education and social assistance?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
I thank the honourable Senator DeWare for doing the mathematics for me. 
I only wish I had done it myself prior to coming into the Senate today. 
I would be happy to investigate the reasons why those particular numbers appear in the manner in which she has presented them.  
Senator DeWare :
 The file of John M .' s is a running commentary on the great events and political vexations that roused Canadian concerns in a long public career , which John M . topped with his final labours as the last of the lifers in the Senate .
 and on lifers which final events . John of long roused last career is s M in concerns vexations Canadian .' Senate . great file that the labours the political The the his , running public a of commentary topped M with John as in a speeches
 with topped in as public speeches s which file lifers concerns , John . of that is the last the labours political and .' Senate career a on M a the his The great M in roused Canadian events running commentary . long John of final the
 the in a . of file with speeches great topped concerns a is lifers events on M Canadian final his the .' public John career , the last John the which in M of commentary vexations political Senate as labours . and that s long The running
It is worth focusing briefly on some of those Macdonald occasions - just to get a measure of the man.  
 a - It occasions Macdonald man of worth get of is those just to measure focusing briefly . the on some
 worth . briefly occasions a get those the just man on of some is of focusing to measure Macdonald It -
 the just focusing It of briefly Macdonald . get a to some man measure worth on - those occasions is of
 a occasions just Macdonald get worth focusing those to of . - man on the briefly is It some of measure
 just measure to . some briefly of It get occasions on is focusing Macdonald worth a of - man the those
 - worth measure a of Macdonald to those occasions man just of . is the It get briefly on some focusing
 occasions man some - on to briefly measure of is the of those just get a It . worth focusing Macdonald
 occasions the of just focusing of on worth to get - . briefly man It is some measure Macdonald those a
 is - get a measure man of briefly worth some on focusing occasions to It the . Macdonald just of those
 briefly get occasions focusing a measure of just Macdonald of - worth on is some those It to . man the
 worth get occasions of to is - of man briefly measure those focusing some on . the a just It Macdonald
 focusing man Macdonald of briefly just measure the . is worth on occasions of get to a - some It those
 focusing worth some of just . - briefly those to measure a man is occasions Macdonald of the get on It
 just to Macdonald a get measure of on worth occasions man focusing briefly - of . those some It the is
 get man worth just on of to is measure - . briefly the focusing some Macdonald of occasions those It a
 the man focusing . those - measure It a worth briefly of get occasions to just on Macdonald of some is
It states: 
A reserve is necessary, since it makes it possible to apply more stable premium rates throughout the economic cycle, thus making it possible to avoid increasing them in a recessionary period. 
In addition, the reserve makes it possible to ensure there are sufficient funds to pay benefits when they are most necessary.  
What happened in the last recession was a $2 billion surplus in the Employment Insurance Account turned into a $6 billion deficit in two years, and it was necessary to increase premiums by 30% at what was already a difficult time for job creation. 
Consequently, the government believes that it is wise to establish a reserve in the Employment Insurance Account.  
I am assuming that since you have given me this response, that was indeed the strategy on the part of the government.  
I then went on to say: 
If I may, I will quote from The Financial Post of today, November 26, a 1997. 
An editorial entitled "EI surplus is a deficit-reduction tax" states clearly that the EI will result: 
...in an accumulated surplus suspected to top a scandalous $19 billion by the end of 1998. 
If you need $8 billion to look after a recession, using the last recession as the example, what kind of recession are you planning on?  
That is to say, what kind of recession are they planning on in the future with a reserve of $18 billion?  
Provincial finance ministers met in Ottawa. 
I think last night they had dinner with Finance Minister Paul Martin. 
In an article in The Globe and Mail yesterday, it was stated: 
With Ontario's Ernie Eves and B.C.'s Andrew Petter leading the charge, the provincial ministers have made it clear that they consider Mr. Martin's recent $1.4 billion cut to unemployment insurance premiums insufficient...  
The premiers have insisted that they have some input into Ottawa's budget-making and how it allocates the surplus among new spending, tax cuts and debt repayment.  
In a telephone interview on Friday, Mr. Petter said the NDP government in British Columbia wants Ottawa to offset a dramatic increase in Canada Pension Plan premiums with reductions in UI premiums.  
"We're worried about the impact that Canada Pension Plan increases will have in terms of the burden they will impose on business and workers, and the potential they have to reduce job creation by a huge amount if they go ahead without some kind of offsetting relief," Mr. Petter said.  
Ontario's Conservative government is also demanding large cuts to UI premiums, Mr. Eves said in an interview...  
 It is worth focusing briefly on some of those Macdonald occasions - just to get a measure of man .
 is get a measure the those - of of just focusing occasions briefly It man Macdonald to on worth some
 of the man those occasions Macdonald to is a on some just focusing . of briefly measure - get It
 those a on occasions to the worth some briefly It . measure focusing man get of of just - is
In 1971, as a member of the committee led by Senator David Croll in search of the roots of Canadian poverty, he said: 
 In he Senator : of committee the by as 1971 in poverty Croll search of a Canadian , member the , roots said led David of
 roots David by Senator : the In said of he Croll a , committee of , poverty 1971 in Canadian member search of the as led
 of , he Senator said of as 1971 , led by the roots of search committee in the In poverty a David Canadian : member Croll
 he Senator said , search of by Croll Canadian the , roots In as member of the David 1971 of a committee led poverty in :
 search said he led of Senator In roots the as of in a by the : Canadian , of David member Croll 1971 committee poverty ,
 In the Canadian he 1971 led as , of : , poverty roots search Senator in member a committee said David Croll of the of by
 led David of roots , In the Croll Senator committee the by he of said Canadian a as : of in , poverty search 1971 member
 : the Canadian 1971 , of as the of Senator search poverty he a led by in , said In of David roots Croll committee member
 , Canadian of In , : roots the of of committee Croll poverty as in by led David the Senator search 1971 member said a he
 of said by , of David Senator a committee the : , 1971 Canadian roots poverty as the search in he led In Croll member of
 committee a member in 1971 of In , he roots the David poverty : by of led as Canadian said of Croll Senator search the ,
 he said as poverty in Canadian committee member search , In a the : Croll of Senator the 1971 by of of David led roots ,
 of the member roots led Croll , poverty of search by , Canadian Senator In committee : 1971 in David as of a said the he
 roots a Croll poverty , member by 1971 , said of in Senator David he : search of of committee the as In led the Canadian
 Croll Canadian of of member said 1971 he by : a of roots Senator poverty David the , search as led In committee the in ,
 a poverty In Canadian Senator of , Croll member the by as , committee David roots of the in he : 1971 of led said search
I must look at the precedents. 
Debate adjourned to await the ruling of the Speaker. 
Quebec 
Linguistic School Boards-Amendment to Section 93 of Constitution-Report of Special Joint Committee Adopted 
On the Order: 
Resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Pépin, seconded by the Honourable Senator Lucier, for the adoption of the Report of the Special Joint Committee to Amend Section 93 of the Constitution Act, 1867 concerning the Quebec School System, deposited with the Clerk of the Senate on November 7, 1997.  
Hon. John Lynch-Staunton (Leader of the Opposition) :
Honourable senators, I would like first of all to thank the co-chairmen of the joint committee, our colleague Senator Lucie Pépin, and the other co-chairman, MP Denis Paradis, for their excellent work in rather exceptional and sometimes trying circumstances.  
In fact, as has been said here and elsewhere, considering the decision of the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs that government support for the amendment to section 93 of the Constitution was already an established fact and that the government majority in committee left no doubt as to what conclusions it would reach, the committee's role could have been limited to that of a rubber stamp.  
Furthermore, the committee was not allowed to hold hearings outside Ottawa and was required to table its report no later than November 7, 1997, with only three weeks to hear witnesses and prepare its report. 
What a contrast with the extremely slow process followed by many less important bills that gather dust for months on parliamentary shelves before receiving Royal Assent.  
In his November 27, 1997 speech, Senator Wood gave a very good description of the strait-jacket in which the joint committee had to work. 
Everything was rushed. 
No announcements were made that hearings were being held, contrary to what is usually done. 
The list of witnesses changed almost from hour to hour. 
Some witnesses had only a few hours' notice that they would be appearing before the committee, and their presentations suffered as a result, as they said themselves.  
Under such conditions, it was quite normal that participation in the committee could have been interpreted as sanctioning the conditions imposed by and for the government. 
However, this was an issue that was worth risking this false interpretation, because the Parliament of Canada is dealing with a request from the Quebec National Assembly, with its sovereignist majority, to exempt Quebec from certain constitutional obligations it has had to live with for 130 years.  
Unfortunately, there was not enough time to involve the committee in preparatory briefings in order for it to have as complete an appreciation and understanding as possible of all the implications of Quebec's resolution. 
As a result, it tended to stray from the substance of the reference before it. 
 In 1971 , as a member of the committee led Senator David Croll in search of the roots of Canadian poverty , he said :
 Croll a , 1971 : of poverty as said in of committee he , In the David led search Senator the by of member roots
 David , of the Croll , led search of by said 1971 he : Senator Canadian as roots of the a in poverty In member
 Senator of committee roots : Croll the in , David poverty led the In member by , as of search he a 1971 of Canadian
In our day and age, we are seeing the introduction in industry of machines and equipment which are wonderful to behold. 
 seeing introduction day and age In are are . industry in to we behold equipment wonderful the our and , which of machines
 are . are the our behold in , wonderful which day In and age industry equipment of we machines introduction to seeing and
 industry , the seeing machines In equipment behold age we . and wonderful in our day are introduction are and to of which
 we equipment introduction industry are our in are which behold of . day age and seeing wonderful In and machines the to ,
 to are our equipment . day introduction and industry , behold in are which we and age seeing In the wonderful of machines
 age are in and . industry machines , behold day we equipment introduction the our of are which wonderful seeing and to In
 wonderful seeing are we to which are behold our and . day and of equipment age introduction , industry In in the machines
 are industry wonderful of . our which seeing we the and are day machines In introduction age to , behold and equipment in
 to wonderful seeing introduction day are which in we In our . and are industry of and , behold equipment the age machines
 and age , and wonderful machines we In introduction equipment seeing the in industry our are day . of which behold to are
 . machines wonderful and introduction to equipment seeing we and of in industry are our day which are age , the In behold
 . of and the to machines in and In which introduction , seeing industry wonderful age behold we are are equipment our day
 and the seeing day which of machines are industry , equipment our are introduction In wonderful to and we . age behold in
 which the to day of are , machines wonderful age and are we introduction equipment behold seeing our . in industry In and
 are age are industry behold our day introduction to . the of and In seeing we in which and wonderful machines equipment ,
 seeing machines . we equipment our to are age day are of the , and industry wonderful introduction in and which In behold
That is an improper practice.  
If the deputy leader could guarantee to us that, on Wednesdays from now on - and we will strive to be cooperative - we will sit no later than 3:30 p.m., unless there is a proven urgency, then I think Senator Stewart's motion is in order. 
However, we need that assurance first.  
Senator Carstairs :
Let me assure the Leader and Deputy Leader of the Opposition that we will do everything on our part to ensure that sessions end on time. 
We did sit yesterday, which was a Monday. 
I can assure senators we will be sitting next Monday in order to fulfil the business of the chamber before the Christmas break.  
Senator Kinsella :
On that basis, I do not think leave is necessary.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is leave granted?  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
He just felt it was not necessary.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Leave is granted.  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is it your pleasure, honourable senators, to adopt the motion?  
Hon. Senators :
 In our day age , we are seeing the introduction in industry of machines and equipment which are wonderful to behold .
 seeing are the to . introduction day we are which and our In wonderful and machines behold , equipment of age industry
 to , and age which wonderful we in machines the In . seeing and are are our introduction industry day behold equipment
 , to In seeing are our equipment introduction age are in day and machines and wonderful the which industry behold . of
They are contributing to a higher standard of living because they are doing away with routine work. 
 of standard contributing . are work a living higher because with They routine to are away doing they
 . living are away They they routine standard work with are because doing of to higher a contributing
 . routine They work because are a are contributing doing with of standard to living higher they away
 of because work away are are They routine standard living a contributing they higher with to . doing
 with doing routine they are standard They living to a . away because work of are higher contributing
 living away they . are a doing standard higher with of because are They work routine contributing to
 of . doing living standard are They contributing work because they to with away a higher routine are
 standard are work higher to a They living are doing with they contributing routine away . because of
 are contributing are to a . living with routine They work away doing of standard higher because they
 they are They contributing away a living of higher are with . standard because work routine to doing
 work with they because routine . doing are a standard contributing of to are away living higher They
 contributing because a of They . away doing with are work standard higher routine they to living are
 routine with higher are away living contributing . to are standard a They of because they work doing
 are . of to away They are doing living because they a routine higher contributing work standard with
 doing higher a are with work to they . because contributing living routine are They away standard of
 work with because . living are a standard They away routine higher contributing are doing to they of
Merry Christmas Canada. 
Let us give Canadians a Christmas present by defeating this bill. 
Let us kill the bill.  
We are well aware of the Liberal record. 
We resent the fact that this bill will not be given full Senate scrutiny. 
We also know what will happen when things go wrong with this bill, as they will. 
I outlined the government's record on making promises. 
We know its record on responsibility. 
I can just see it. 
When this bill is in shambles, Paul Martin will be 95. 
Jean Chrétien will be 95 or 96 or 102.  
Senator Taylor :
They will still be in power.  
Senator Tkachuk :
He will not take responsibilities. 
The Grits will never take responsibility for their actions, as they did not when they cancelled the Somalia inquiry, and when they made false accusations against a former prime minister. 
I don't know who, but I'm not responsible."  
There was not an iota of evidence to prove that what they were saying was correct. 
They did not take any responsibility after cancelling the EH-101 contract. 
They are still talking about it in cabinet. 
 They are contributing to a higher standard of living because they are doing with routine work .
 They a contributing to standard with . away are are of because living doing they higher work
 they a because to are work routine with standard away contributing higher They of are living doing
 higher a with are away work living because they to standard . contributing They doing of are
Yet to those who performed that hard labour, it is small consolation to know that the general standard of living has risen.  
 that . to living know of it Yet consolation the standard those to labour who is general has small performed , that hard risen
 general has those the to standard of performed , . living who small it Yet consolation labour that is risen know that hard to
 risen to hard to know standard who that it of . , living labour performed that is the those Yet general small has consolation
 of that small that performed has who Yet labour those standard the living risen general . to know hard to is , consolation it
 general that consolation risen to that has know to labour who the it is of small living Yet , performed hard those . standard
 the Yet those who hard that is living general risen . it that to labour know small of to has standard , consolation performed
 general consolation living to performed , know hard to Yet standard that it that is the small of risen those . labour who has
 those who labour it standard general that that know Yet consolation the to is , has to . risen of small performed living hard
 that to performed labour that Yet has small who , of general hard risen to know standard is it consolation . living the those
 of labour Yet know living hard risen those standard to that , performed it who that the consolation general is . to has small
 those of consolation has to who living performed that labour small it is , Yet know hard general . the risen to standard that
 has of general those who labour the that it know to standard consolation to that . Yet performed risen hard is living , small
 Yet know . consolation general who that has performed standard of labour hard , those is to the it to small living that risen
 of Yet consolation who standard that know hard performed living general the it has is . to to that , labour those risen small
 . those that who to consolation labour risen , small Yet performed to that of hard standard general is the know living it has
 know . it that Yet to is , risen hard living small labour consolation general those the to that standard who has of performed
Each institution will have the option of maintaining or reviewing its current status as a Catholic or Protestant school. 
Students will continue to take religion courses or to receive pastoral animation or religious care and guidance services if they so desire.  
Before the end of the third year after the linguistic school boards are in place, the schools will be asked to consult the parents and decide whether or not they wish to maintain their confessional status.  
Those unfamiliar with Catholic and Protestant school boards in Montreal and Quebec City should know that in many cases, particularly in the Protestant system, it is the language of instruction which predominates. 
Many schools have little, if any, religious content, while in others it is very strong. 
Parents already have a say in how much religion they want their children exposed to and that will continue under the new system.  
While section 93 guarantees are only a matter of religious denominations, the essential characteristics of the resulting Quebec school system have, nonetheless, been linguistic. 
One does not speak often of going to a Catholic or Protestant school any more. 
One usually speaks of going to a French or an English school. 
It was inevitable, then, that the committee would be drawn into a debate on how the amendment of section 93 might affect linguistic rights, particularly those claimed by the minority.  
While section 23 of the Charter establishes minority linguistic education rights, Quebec is not bound by all its provisions and so has adopted legislation in this field which, in effect, creates two classes of English-speaking Quebecers as it distinguishes between those educated in Canada and those educated elsewhere. 
Only those parents educated in English in Canada can pass on the benefit of minority English language education to their children. 
Those Quebec parents who were educated in English outside of Canada must have their children educated in French. 
We have in Quebec two classes of English-speaking Quebecers.  
Quebec has been repeatedly criticized for this discrimination, and rightly so. 
How this undesirable situation developed can be traced to the then Minister of Justice, who is Prime Minister today.  
I will quote from his book, Straight from the Heart , where Mr. Chrétien describes how he was responsible for exempting Quebec from the crucial parts of section 23. 
He says: 
During the weeks that followed, I continued to try to overcome Quebec's objections, to the extent of modifying the principle of minority language education and agreeing to fiscal compensation when Quebec opted out of amendments that affected culture and education. 
That required a hell of a lot of selling to Trudeau, but he went along in the end, as did the nine other premiers, who were willing to reopen their sealed bargain in order to bring in Quebec. 
 Yet to those performed that hard labour , it is small consolation to know that the general standard of living has risen .
 performed to of labour hard is Yet to has , small living who the general those it consolation that . risen know that
 hard know of those it consolation . living is to general who has labour the that to that performed small standard , Yet
 to it to general standard small living hard performed Yet . of those know risen has who is labour consolation the that that
Oil, natural gas and hydro power have been responsible for Nova Scotia coal losing much of its traditional market, and in most cases that market will never be regained, no matter how much assistance is given by government. 
 natural and have of is assistance Scotia cases regained given , been losing traditional be will , coal government . Nova gas hydro responsible Oil never and most power , for matter by much no much in that market its how market
 , , much be given and will is been power and coal no market responsible Scotia most by hydro market never . gas traditional government losing have natural assistance Oil how Nova for regained cases much , matter its that of in
 responsible cases in how power market , , that its is natural no assistance much have regained government and gas never been of Oil and losing much . given be market for Scotia most , coal will hydro by matter Nova traditional
 been and cases that assistance in Scotia have . power , Nova never its much market how losing and natural Oil given will , responsible market be regained for is of matter no hydro most , coal much gas government traditional by
 losing how been of Nova coal Oil most power Scotia market gas market is have given hydro much , in responsible for natural . government no assistance regained that and , and never its traditional will , matter be by cases much
 most assistance in Nova Scotia of been gas responsible have market that be , given will how much , its coal and matter regained and Oil traditional market is never natural , government . much losing for by no cases hydro power
 market have coal government its , by much no much responsible natural given in and be most and is regained Nova traditional Oil never , assistance matter power hydro , losing for will been market gas . of that how cases Scotia
 most responsible traditional power by no market and in , much gas that Nova natural cases . losing , is Scotia never for assistance government much hydro given have , Oil be how of regained its will matter market been coal and
 most have never gas Oil for , given assistance hydro power and by that Scotia cases market Nova in how coal . , matter responsible be will much regained much its , and market no government been losing of is traditional natural
 , cases market been regained coal be Oil its government gas will no , how responsible losing is Scotia for matter that power market much hydro traditional and never and assistance have . , Nova given most by of in natural much
 assistance much most and regained of much hydro by and , have been gas traditional in losing power market how government natural Nova Scotia responsible matter is never , coal that for . , cases will Oil market no given be its
 much matter be , much , cases assistance regained no how never Scotia . market been hydro is by Oil in have for that market natural traditional Nova most , losing government power coal and will gas and responsible given of its
 and in by Oil natural Nova been its gas will given most , how assistance have matter much regained power , cases coal responsible market is and for losing much , that of traditional government hydro Scotia market never no be .
 how regained be . no assistance coal cases and matter that given been much Oil , gas market its hydro Scotia in power by losing is , have responsible will Nova of traditional natural never , much government for and market most
 in and natural market cases that for responsible coal no most Scotia and never , government much losing traditional gas power , be . been how will much of hydro its matter is assistance Oil , by regained given market have Nova
 , cases much been in by is traditional losing responsible . given be , have power regained will assistance gas no much Scotia natural hydro Nova market its matter most never government Oil market coal of and how , for that and
Senator Grafstein :
Honourable senators, there is constitutional law. 
Quebec wants to proceed by the rule of law. 
They are seeking to renovate their system under the rule of law and the Constitution.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
That is not my question.  
Senator Grafstein :
I assume that if they choose to proceed, they can. 
However, why should we in the Senate allow any province to proceed in a way that we consider unlawful? 
If there is an amendment to the Constitution, each senator in his or her heart and mind, after reviewing the testimony, must come to a conclusion. 
He or she can either vote for, against or abstain from the vote on the resolution.  
They want to be under the law, as does the Province of Newfoundland. 
They want to be under the Constitution. 
If they meet the standards of a constitutional change, I, for one, will support them, notwithstanding the fact that I mistrust their motivation and mistrust what they say. 
However, on matter of dealing with the rule of law, I am bound by the rule of law.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
My question has nothing to do with that answer. 
It was renewed in 1982 and given protection from the Charter. 
Quebec has finally adopted a linguistic school system that looks very promising and can be implemented without section 93 being amended, unlike Newfoundland, which needs an amendment to Term 17 to be able to implement a non-denominational system. 
The two resolutions are completely different in content and intent.  
 Oil , natural gas and hydro power have been responsible for Nova Scotia coal losing much of its traditional market , and in most cases that market will never be regained , no matter how assistance is given by government .
 responsible , traditional for regained much given be coal gas by been Scotia matter in cases never how that , will and . most Oil market its and assistance , is no market Nova have losing government hydro natural much power
 be power Oil how regained , is market , given never cases hydro its government responsible that . much Nova losing much in of been for no market most natural Scotia and by and , matter assistance coal traditional will have
 cases assistance have , most hydro Oil regained power , for Nova of gas responsible much , is matter will market how never its by much no and coal that and be Scotia market given natural losing . traditional in been
Not only that, but in a legal dispute concerning the relationship between governments, I think there is a danger that our judicial system might be adversely affected.  
 concerning system relationship our adversely might that between but that , be , the only danger legal dispute in I a Not think a there . affected judicial governments is
 think adversely the dispute be but our affected Not system relationship is danger . that concerning a that I , in might only a governments judicial legal , between there
 our think but governments there legal be between affected dispute Not that a a , judicial might concerning is in I that system , only . adversely danger relationship the
 affected be Not adversely , in danger think that . a system dispute might is the relationship there between a , governments legal our but concerning I only judicial that
 in a . I , there , but that might danger Not adversely affected that our a the think be between concerning governments only legal system relationship is dispute judicial
 governments affected , Not concerning system dispute a the I there relationship be that . judicial but is only , danger our a that might in think adversely legal between
 think that but the only a relationship affected be system there adversely between our dispute Not legal . danger judicial , a in might I is that , governments concerning
 there concerning but affected system a adversely danger , dispute judicial I that think between in . only is legal that might the a our be Not governments relationship ,
 think our Not that that in a judicial , adversely . be might only between concerning is the a relationship there but danger I governments dispute legal affected , system
 judicial , think in danger concerning dispute that our be governments a is between that . there a adversely might system legal Not only I , but relationship affected the
 might in only system , think . be there danger a dispute legal relationship a adversely our governments the but Not judicial between affected , that concerning I is that
 in relationship that dispute is system the concerning our there . governments be affected judicial only a I a , , danger adversely between that think legal might Not but
 relationship that adversely system our concerning the judicial is a dispute between think governments there danger , a legal Not I in , but affected be only that might .
 might the but system dispute think there governments that Not adversely in only a is I legal concerning relationship , be . , danger a that between affected our judicial
 relationship . , the in dispute concerning a Not a that think be adversely legal our judicial danger that between but governments I , affected system might is there only
 be legal a that the between relationship governments might there I system . dispute , our , in concerning only affected danger think is adversely judicial but Not that a
Bill C-2 is just another in a series of bad bills, incompetent work and dictatorial action. 
It was introduced last week in the Senate, preceded by time allocation in the other place. 
With passage of this bill, the government will be imposing the largest tax grab in the history of the country. 
Canadians are unaware of what is happening, in particular our young people who will be the most affected and the most mistreated. 
We owe it to them, our grandchildren and our children, to study this legislation thoroughly and to amend it, because it is not their fault that this program has been so badly managed. 
They will have little chance of collecting under the CPP, hence the changes the government intends to make.  
We are simply shovelling our hard-earned money into the greedy hands of Paul Martin, Minister of Finance, who wants to be the man who slays the deficit dragon, and we know how he intends to do it. 
He has followed three policy themes to accomplish that end.  
First, he has transferred much of the tax burden to the provinces, forcing what I call "downloaded increased taxes." 
Provincial and municipal governments, who were receiving less money, had to increase taxes. 
The government transferred debt.  
Second, this government has taken advantage of the low interest rates which resulted from the efforts of the Conservative government over eight years to bring the deficit and inflation under control and to bring interest rates down.  
Third, Paul Martin then not only raised licence fees and taxes, he used the accumulated surplus in the EI fund to pay down the deficit. 
It is this third policy theme with which we, on this side, feel most uncomfortable. 
He used the surplus in the EI fund, not to extend benefits, not to reduce premiums - which is normally what is done in a payroll deduction - but to cut benefits for a totally separate policy objective. 
He used this payroll tax purely and simply, to achieve his policy goal of cutting the deficit.  
That is why the Auditor General is prohibited from examining the fund unless the directors of the fund agree. 
It should not be for the directors to agree or disagree. 
Parliament must insist that the Auditor General report to us on the fund and on its administration. 
However, the Auditor General will report to the directors of the fund on how they manage their affairs. 
 Not only that , but in a legal dispute concerning the relationship between governments , I think there is a danger that our system might be adversely affected .
 but judicial in a between a I might danger legal there be is the that relationship think governments system our dispute affected only that Not concerning adversely . ,
 Not a the only concerning adversely , might a between I system governments legal but think danger there judicial dispute that in be our is affected , that relationship
 governments there , is our in I . might a only legal relationship that dispute judicial concerning the that be , between affected adversely danger Not system but think
In October 1994, he gave his last major address before illness began to set in. 
 In October his , to before . gave in set address began 1994 he last major illness
 to , address illness gave last his before major in In began 1994 . he set October
 address to gave before In October major , . last in he 1994 set began illness his
 1994 October his he to In before major , gave in address began last set . illness
 his illness he 1994 to before address in gave In . major , October began last set
 in set last to major he gave before illness . October In address 1994 his began ,
 , last he illness In . his in began major to gave 1994 address before set October
 last he before set his October , . 1994 to major in In began illness gave address
 to he in before , gave began illness major his October In set address 1994 last .
 1994 illness set last in to gave , began he his before . major In October address
 , in began major set October In gave 1994 illness his . to last before he address
 1994 gave . , began major he set before illness to last address In his in October
 , illness 1994 . his gave address October to major before began set last in he In
 he in before October , . In his last address began illness major 1994 to set gave
 . October last In began address to in set he before 1994 illness gave , major his
 set major . in to he October his address began last In before , illness 1994 gave
No one was thinking what would happen when people in the large demographic group turned 65.  
The amendments provided for the elimination of CPP children's benefits which previously applied - they changed it again - where more than four children of a deceased or disabled contributor had been eligible for such benefits. 
Now, if you have more than four kids, that is fine, too. 
However, it was another increased cost to what should be a pension plan. 
The government should have taken the money out of something else, or increased the amount of CPP premiums so that people were told the truth, and also told, "To pay for this it will cost you 10 cents or 20 cents more a month." 
The cash was there, so they used that cash.  
Legislation was enacted for spousal credits. 
When people get divorced, they have to keep up with the times. 
They can split the benefits. 
That was not done before. 
At the inception of this program, that was not allowed.  
Because men die earlier and women live longer, the money went mostly to women. 
It costs more money. 
I am not saying that is bad. 
I am just saying that all of a sudden it costs more money because women are either lucky or live better or cleaner lives than men, and they live longer.  
Senator Gigantès :
They survive us. 
It takes strength and intelligence.  
Senator Moore :
Meaning we are not intelligent?  
 In October 1994 , gave his last major address before illness began to set in .
 before In began to gave set he address , last major 1994 October . his in
 before 1994 began , set . to his In address October he in major last illness
 he in last began , In set before address 1994 October to his illness . gave
There was much criticism of the Canadian Legion's denial of admission to their branches of people whose religion required them to wear head-dress at all times. 
 of people - ' times their Legion There to s religion to Canadian all much dress head criticism was them whose denial branches the required . wear at of of admission
 people There s whose of denial was Legion times dress - to . Canadian head wear admission to the much ' criticism required of religion all at of their them branches
 them Legion branches ' admission denial - head much of the religion of all criticism dress whose at to required their . s people wear times of to There was Canadian
 people them admission religion the s to times of wear criticism . dress There branches ' their whose to Canadian of denial head all of - was required Legion at much
 wear denial all criticism ' admission at Canadian - much head to . their s people Legion dress of There them of the times of required was branches to religion whose
 branches was . dress wear denial of whose the admission required ' them religion all times of to s at Legion their much Canadian to people - head There of criticism
 of - to them of Legion denial dress wear at was all branches much required of There the their to s people Canadian ' head admission . whose times criticism religion
 There at Canadian branches wear denial whose times of dress to Legion of criticism to head them all of religion required s was . much their admission - the people '
 s at Canadian much There the to them required dress to whose times of - religion all admission head people Legion of criticism . branches wear was ' their denial of
 Legion required of of whose them criticism dress wear their head the religion admission denial branches ' at much . to There of s all was to Canadian - people times
 the at admission Canadian people of was to head times of their all Legion required much s denial them There dress . criticism wear ' religion branches to of - whose
 to denial religion criticism ' dress branches was Canadian the required to s . of wear them whose Legion all There - people of much of head at admission their times
 of much their at criticism whose There head Canadian of of Legion people required them wear religion s all . the was branches admission - to to times denial dress '
 dress branches the head - to much at people admission to denial required times ' religion their Legion of was Canadian criticism all of of whose wear . There them s
 ' . much head Legion s to the There them whose of people admission denial - at was to times criticism of Canadian of all dress wear branches their required religion
 head s wear their religion of criticism to of of all branches required to people ' the There times was at dress much - admission . Canadian them denial whose Legion
Even for the private sector specializing in this type of operations, whether mutual funds, national brokerages, or trusts, when the volume exceeds $50 or $60 million, the performance ratio is not proportional to the volume of the funds being managed.  
Private enterprise is aware of that. 
It seems only the government is not.  
The huge monopoly to be created presents a very high risk of inefficiency, of bad investments, and therefore of poor performance. 
Why should everyone be obliged to contribute, to provide funds to a manager who may do a worse job than the person who actually owns those funds?  
If some are deemed to have not done a good job, they are replaced, something is done about it.  
We are familiar with the virtues of competition in the private sector, which results in a raised level of performance. 
That is good for the consumer, so why would it not be applicable to this particular type of services?  
Analysis of investments, or the decision as to the choice of investment for a business, is a highly technical undertaking, but also a risky one. 
This is why, in all wisdom, we must not "put all our eggs in one basket," as the old saying goes. 
Ought we not to have a number of baskets instead, so that any one bad decision will not be a huge disaster?  
This diversification of investments is wise; ought it not to be institutionalized in the law, and ought not the number of independent responsibility centres for investments to be increased?  
My third point concerns the relationship between the government, the Minister of Finance in particular, and the agency in question. 
It will always be tempting to use these funds to finance governments, at lower rates than if it had been invested in the open market. 
That is, in fact, what has been done since 1996 under the present system. 
It must be ensured that a conflict of interest of this kind is not permitted at all. 
I will return to this shortly.  
My fourth point concerns investment policy. 
The law should provide that the administrators of the fund are responsible for ensuring contributors a reasonable pension, while providing them with the best return, that is, the safest and best return possible.  
Canada's economy represents about 2.5 per cent of the world economy. 
 There was much criticism of the Canadian Legion ' s denial of admission to their branches of people whose religion required them to wear head - dress at times .
 to them Canadian of whose times branches their There religion Legion people required at ' all to the criticism head s dress . admission of denial - was much wear
 at There times people required much admission of to s Canadian them denial was religion criticism branches the head - ' all of their wear . whose of to dress
 whose at all . the of There them admission to wear much times their to was denial of ' of dress s Canadian head criticism required Legion branches - religion
He said: 
 : said He
 He : said
 He said :
 He said :
 said He :
 He : said
 He : said
 He said :
 : He said
 said : He
 He : said
 He : said
 : said He
 said He :
 : said He
 said : He
Thank you, senators.  
In the Financial Post or The Globe and Mail it was recently explained that, as employers will have to pay higher CPP premiums and as most employers or companies have a limited budget for wages, they will have to pass on the cost to people through the price of their product, or they will have to lay people off, or they will have to go to contract workers.  
The concern is the long-term effect this huge increase will have on full-time jobs.  
On November 18, Senator Oliver said: 
Canadians who turn 69, 70, and 71 this year have only another month and a half to convert their RRSPs to an annuity or a RRIF. 
If they fail to do so, they could lose up to one-half of every dollar they have in their RRSPs to taxes; yet many of these same Canadians are not aware that the government has lowered the age to 69 and of the deadline for making the conversion.  
Indeed, a survey conducted last spring found that only about 30 per cent of RRSP holders aged 50 to 70 were aware of these new rules. 
Bearing this in mind, and considering the confusion that now exists about this matter, will the government consider extending the conversion time so as to ensure that no senior citizen is forced to hand over half of his or her life savings as a result of being caught off-guard by this proposal?  
In other words, will the government ensure that they are not nailed with more taxes?  
Senator Oliver continued: 
We were told that the net tax grab from this and other measures that restrict tax assistance for retirement savings, notably yet another freeze in RRSP contributions, would total about $40 million this year and $175 million next year. 
We were not told how much of that came from lowering the age for RRSP conversions.  
When that many Canadians are unaware of what is happening, we have a severe problem.  
On November 20, I said: 
Honourable senators, I wish to address my question to the Leader of the Government in the Senate. 
It dates back to October 1, 1997, to a question asked at that time by Senator Meighen, which is only 51 days ago.  
I will quote Senator Meighen, who said: 
It has been 51 days!  
On November 25, I said the following: 
In a paper released the week prior to November 25, the Association of Canadian Pension Management said that the Seniors Benefit will stifle savings. 
 He :
 : said
 : He
 : said
I know many of the men from my small town who lost their lives in World War II. 
 small men from the lost know War of I many town my World their lives II who in .
 . lost many my in War II town know small their men World from lives who I of the
 . World lives small from town my II know who in I their War men lost many the of
 my of in who the their II town World lost small . men lives know from I War many
 town who know . men my War World in of the many II from lost lives small I their
 in . who my World from II lives of the town know small War I men lost their many
 men I small in lost the who my know their from . World many II town of lives War
 small World men know War town my of who from the I lives their many in II lost .
 their in town men lost II many small who I . my from War the World know of lives
 lives who in . my from of men their War I many know World the small lost town II
 small my World in War . know lives their many lost II who the town of from I men
 in . of town from lost small World men know War their my I II lives the who many
 II small I town my men lives . know from their who the War many of World lost in
 of who I many the War small lost from World my . lives II their know men town in
 I the who in their lives II know World from men . many War town my of lost small
 men . the know their small in World II lost many my from I lives of who War town
They are seeking to renovate their system under the rule of law and the Constitution.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
That is not my question.  
Senator Grafstein :
I assume that if they choose to proceed, they can. 
However, why should we in the Senate allow any province to proceed in a way that we consider unlawful? 
If there is an amendment to the Constitution, each senator in his or her heart and mind, after reviewing the testimony, must come to a conclusion. 
He or she can either vote for, against or abstain from the vote on the resolution.  
They want to be under the law, as does the Province of Newfoundland. 
They want to be under the Constitution. 
If they meet the standards of a constitutional change, I, for one, will support them, notwithstanding the fact that I mistrust their motivation and mistrust what they say. 
However, on matter of dealing with the rule of law, I am bound by the rule of law.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
My question has nothing to do with that answer. 
It was renewed in 1982 and given protection from the Charter. 
Quebec has finally adopted a linguistic school system that looks very promising and can be implemented without section 93 being amended, unlike Newfoundland, which needs an amendment to Term 17 to be able to implement a non-denominational system. 
The two resolutions are completely different in content and intent.  
Again, my question relates to the fact that the new linguistic school board process is well under way. 
There will be elections to the boards in June. 
What impact does the modification of section 93 or the non-modification of section 93 have on what is already under way?  
 I know many of the men from my small town who lost their in World War II .
 lives of in my their the many men . from small I town lost War know World II
 I who II my . in of lost men War know many their small the town from lives
 small town men I my lives War lost of World from in the II know who their many
There were 68 of them. 
 were . There 68 of them
 . of were There them 68
 of There were them 68 .
 68 There were them of .
 were them 68 . There of
 of them 68 There . were
 68 There were . of them
 were There them . of 68
 of There them . 68 were
 . were them There of 68
 them . were 68 of There
 68 them of . There were
 of There were . 68 them
 . There were of 68 them
 of . were 68 There them
 . 68 were There of them
I would first like to know what conditions the Prime Minister was referring to?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, the Government of Canada has always said that Quebecers would not be kept within Canada against their will. 
That being said, breaking up a country is not a step that one would take lightly. 
Senator Graham :
The will of Quebecers to leave must be clearly expressed. 
In addition, of course, any process that would lead to secession must respect the law.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
What does the law say on secession?  
Senator Graham :
The government has asked the Supreme Court of Canada to rule on the legality of unilateral secession.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
I had thought that Mr. Dion answered that question himself on the weekend when he said that a UDI would be illegal.  
Senator Nolin :
The Prime Minister has said he was prepared to negotiate. 
The Leader of the Government in the Senate has said the government is not prepared to negotiate.  
This morning, the Quebec minister of intergovernmental affairs, Mr. Brassard, said, and I quote: 
This is what we have always said.  
Bear in mind that this minister is a separatist. 
I repeat what he said: 
 There were 68 them .
 68 them of There were
 them There . were of
 68 of . were There
When I look around at that point in the meetings, I recognize many present are remembering someone close to them who did not survive. 
 someone are When to did look meetings point at them I close the present recognize that remembering , not survive many . around I who in
 not around many at , are survive in I who recognize the to that present . look close When someone I them did point meetings remembering
 remembering did meetings look in recognize I at point are When , many to present close not them that who the I someone survive around .
 that , the I are I around recognize not at survive point look many meetings . them close who present in remembering When someone to did
 present in many I survive that who to point look close . recognize them remembering are around meetings at When someone I did not the ,
 them at the around in remembering When are present . did I who close I not meetings survive point look , recognize that to someone many
 many remembering I in someone not I When are . survive close them did look meetings present to point that , the recognize at who around
 around look When I , them that present survive in the someone I at are not did recognize point remembering meetings close who many . to
 not remembering close recognize in point them to present look are someone the . survive I around who meetings , many When that did at I
 survive meetings recognize point When I are at I around remembering look that many not close them did to present who in , someone . the
 . look survive I remembering , not many I them someone close recognize did to meetings present in around point are that When the at who
 remembering many survive I that did them , recognize point close meetings not are When to at present in who around look I someone . the
 remembering the look When survive at someone recognize many I meetings not them . I around , who are did point to close in present that
 survive in at someone . them point meetings to did When close not recognize I who present around the remembering I are look that many ,
 that the look did them are close remembering present . When I many meetings point , not in to survive someone recognize I who around at
 many did at recognize someone close who meetings remembering are to . When around not look , the point I I them that present in survive
We questioned these representatives during the hearings as to whether their underlying groups agreed with the position they had taken.  
On the Catholic side, we had the position of the archbishops, as limited as it was. 
We had Catholic school boards and Catholic teachers. 
I remember specifically cross-examining Catholic teachers and asking whether they had discussions with students and their parents respecting the changes. 
Their view was that they represented the broad consensus of parents and students as it applied to this amendment. 
All parents wanted a change to renovate the school system, and this was the best modality in which to do that.  
I agree with Senator Lynch-Staunton, Senator Wood and Senator Lavoie-Roux that this is not perfect. 
However, in addition to the evidence, we did refer to opinion polls that seemed to suggest a strong support for reform along these lines.  
Yes, the resolution is imperfect. 
We would like to have done it "our way," as Frank Sinatra used to say, but we must deal with the Province of Quebec in this case. 
We had to bend imperfect tools to see whether they fit our minimum requirements. 
In my view, they did not fit our minimum requirements; they fit our reasonable requirements for constitutional amendment.  
Senator Wood :
Is it not true in the letter from the bishops of Quebec - the letter the honourable senator read - that they were in favour of repealing section 93? 
They questioned linguistic rights and suggested that denominational guarantees established by 107 be maintained. 
There was a caveat there that my honourable friend forgot to read.  
Senator Grafstein :
I find myself in great difficulty defending Roman Catholic theology let alone letters from Roman Catholic archbishops. 
I will leave it to each senator to come to his or her own conclusion on the testimony and on the letters, which are appended to the report.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
 When I look around at point in the meetings , I recognize many present are remembering someone close to them who did not survive .
 that . I close survive someone them I not point look When the who are did many meetings present remembering recognize , at around in
 survive the are meetings I When them to many I who , . in look remembering point that not present recognize someone around at did
 not at present around are the recognize someone to them who meetings that in point , close survive I When remembering look I . did
I, like others, may recall the first casualties from our town. 
 first recall casualties , others . I , our town like the from may
 may our I , casualties , first town from . others recall like the
 town I from our like , . casualties recall , may others the first
 our the first may from others town , like recall . , casualties I
 recall town from . may , others like I first casualties , our the
 first recall our like the may . town , , casualties from others I
 first the recall from like town , our casualties others . may , I
 the recall our town may . casualties like I first , from others ,
 like town from others recall I . first may casualties our , , the
 I recall our , like first casualties others , from the . town may
 town from may , I . , the like first recall casualties our others
 . others first from recall may casualties , , like town I our the
 , others the town . our , like first from recall may casualties I
 first . our from town like casualties the may , I , recall others
 others casualties town the I recall like our , , from first . may
 may like town first our recall . the others , from , casualties I
The government finally yielded to the pressures from Liberal opposition members.  
Some people were concerned that the debate on national unity might detract from the substance of the amendment. 
If the only concern of the special joint committee had been to prove that "federalism works," it would not have insisted on hearing this evidence showing that there was a consensus among Catholic and Protestant parents. 
From the very beginning, the Government of Quebec assured this Parliament that there was an appropriate consensus in favour of the amendment in that province. 
However, the committee insisted on assessing and challenging these statements - so much so that the Quebec ministers responsible for education and for intergovernmental affairs eventually appeared before the committee, along with the official opposition critics on these matters. 
Clearly, what was - and still is - at issue is the legitimacy of the amendment.  
It was mentioned repeatedly that, as a result of the Supreme Court decisions, it has become obvious that the rights that are positively guaranteed under section 93 are not as broad as they were originally assumed to be. 
However, we do not believe that the amendment was justified because the denominational education rights guaranteed under section 93 were nothing more than empty shells. 
Had we been satisfied that the majority of Catholics or Protestants in Quebec were opposed to the amendment, it would not have mattered whether or not their rights carried much weight. 
I think that Senator Lavoie-Roux was quite right in saying that minorities often require special protection to be free to exercise their rights. 
But it is possible to limit or remove this special protection with the consent of a majority of this minority.  
It was then a matter of figuring out why a majority of members of these two groups were prepared to relinquish these privileges. 
It is important to point out that representatives of all the groups involved were consulted.  
Be that as it may, honourable senators, this amendment will not spell the end of denominational, be it Catholic or Protestant, education in Quebec. 
The Education Act of this province gives parents the right to choose between Catholic or Protestant denominational education for their children. 
It will be up to parents to decide whether publicly funded denominational education should be maintained indefinitely. 
The fact that the notwithstanding clause was used by the Government of Quebec to protect the existing education legislation seems to indicate, however, that the government reacted favourably to the wish expressed by some parents to maintain Protestant and Catholic denominational schools. 
We have every reason to believe that the place of religion in public education will be subject to a full, open and democratic debate and that the parents' choice will continue to prevail, as it has for so long outside Montreal and Quebec City.  
Throughout the debate that took place before the special joint committee and in this House, we considered the fact that subsection 23(1) of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms does not apply to Quebec and the issue of whether the amendment to section 93 would prejudice the educational rights of native Quebecers. 
Section 23 of the Charter and section 93 of the Constitution Act of 1867 concern educational rights and, instinctively, we might think they are closely linked. 
 I , like others , recall the first casualties from our town .
 , may the like . casualties , our first I others recall from
 from our first town . recall I , , may the like others
 casualties may . town , the , others our from first I like
They were two bright young men, one a university student, and the other an employee of the coal company. 
 young the . company employee two of university , were other a They student men an bright and the coal one ,
 other university one young company an the the of coal men and employee bright . They student were , , two a
 of and employee were company coal student one two the other the , men young bright . an , a university They
 company coal were an one of young and men university a the the , , bright . other They two student employee
 coal company one a bright and university , employee an student . , other young the two men of were They the
 of . were , employee bright two company the , an a student the one university They other men and coal young
 were and coal , two the employee men , a university an They young one company . student of the other bright
 employee other the , university of were one bright coal , the men They two . young a and company student an
 the of university student coal one other and young , were company They men the employee a two bright . , an
 and student young one other , They a the the of were . an two men bright employee coal university , company
 coal company an a university and They the of bright one student the employee young two . , other , were men
 young were and university the They one of two men , other employee . a , bright company student coal the an
 one student the bright an were company other university young and coal They , men . employee , of the two a
 of coal , an university the They two the young , one employee were a student company and men . other bright
 one university of were student young company They two , employee bright other . the a the an coal , and men
 coal bright other men , of . They student young two company were , the a university employee and one an the
Meaning we are not intelligent?  
Senator Gigantès :
Not as much as the women are.  
Senator Tkachuk :
Then the benefits were extended. 
The provision went from having to live together for seven years to share in CPP benefits - in other words, when one died the other one would pick up the cash - down to one year. 
If you lived together for one year, the other person was considered your husband or your wife, and benefits again were extended to the surviving spouse - another increased cost.  
Yesterday, Senator Kirby alluded to the possibility that there may be other social changes in those arrangements. 
I know what that means. 
It is possible that governments may recognize gay marriages, and I think he wanted to let us know that there may be these kinds of changes taking place. 
That is fine, if the government wants to do that. 
Now you have two guys living together; one dies, the other one is picking up some cash. 
That costs more money. 
Well, two guys who live together for one year may not be gay. 
How would you know?  
Senator Gigantès :
You want surveillance cameras?  
Senator Tkachuk :
So there is an opportunity for fraud. 
This is not a pension program. 
 They were two bright young men , one a student , and the other an employee of the coal company .
 . bright company coal They , the student one employee two a and the , were university men other an of
 were the one student , They an company bright of young two and men employee a university the coal other .
 two coal student the university They employee an were company a . young of one men , , other and the
They joined the Air Force early in the war. 
 They Air joined the war Force early the in .
 Air early war the joined the . Force in They
 the early the Force war joined They . in Air
 . the war in early They Air joined the Force
 the Air war They joined early Force in the .
 the in war They early Force . the joined Air
 Air They joined Force . the the early war in
 the in joined Air Force They the early . war
 Air war early the They the in joined Force .
 war They in joined Air Force the early the .
 Force . in war Air the early joined They the
 in . the the war joined Air early They Force
 the They war the early . in joined Force Air
 the They in . Force war early the joined Air
 They the . Air early in joined the war Force
 Air Force in They the the . war joined early
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
Report of Committee 
Income Tax Conventions Implementation Act, 1997 
Report of Committee 
Present State and Future of Agriculture 
Report of Agriculture and Forestry Committee Tabled 
Present State and Future of Forestry 
Report of Agriculture and Forestry Committee Tabled 
Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration 
Seventh Report of Committee Presented 
ADJOURNMENT 
International Assembly of French-Speaking Parliamentarians 
Meeting held in Luxembourg-Report of Canadian Section Tabled 
Foreign Affairs 
Committee Authorized to Meet During Sitting of the Senate 
The Senate 
Conduct of Business-Notice of Inquiry 
QUESTION PERIOD 
Federal-Provincial Relations 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Province of Quebec-Request for Particulars 
 They joined the Air Force in the war .
 Air war Force early in . the They the
 They Air joined war Force the in early .
 the the . Air in war early Force They
I do not know exactly when or where the custom - 
 not custom where know exactly when I or - do the
 exactly custom know not I or the when - where do
 custom when not do or exactly - where I know the
 know - or I the where custom exactly not do when
 the where when know custom I do - or not exactly
 the not do custom exactly or where know when I -
 not I know exactly where do custom or when the -
 not the I exactly do or know - custom when where
 where - when not or exactly I do custom know the
 do know custom the exactly or - not I where when
 know the where - not exactly when or do I custom
 not exactly when where - I do custom or know the
 not I do the know where custom when or exactly -
 when or do know exactly custom I - where not the
 or do I custom the exactly know when - where not
 not custom when where the or I - do exactly know
The minister should be able to provide assurance, the lack of which so far has caused many of us here to remain hesitant to support this resolution, myself included.  
Hon. Jerahmiel S. Grafstein :
Honourable senators, education is everyone's business. 
When citizens debate their children's education, sometimes passion overwhelms reason.  
It was with some trepidation that I entered the thicket of the Quebec school question, coming as I do from the province of Ontario. 
The dense history of the Quebec school question holds lessons for us all.  
Once appointed to the committee, I set about to better understand the tangled roots of history lying beneath this question, to digest as best I could the numerous articles, studies and especially reports commissioned by successive Quebec governments over the last few years ranging from the articulate Parent commission to the Kenniff report to the findings of the Estates General. 
It became evident to me that a deep and thorough consensus had developed for radical reformation, at least among the elites of Quebec. 
Claude Ryan, an old friend of mine and the then Minister of Education, had galvanized that reform process over a decade ago in Quebec. 
It was equally clear to me that the existing school structures were in desperate need of renovation, particularly in light of the overlapping school structures in Quebec and the financial restraints facing all governments.  
Rather than an historic essay, perhaps it would be simpler if I could share with you my thought processes and the evidence I found as a member of the Standing Senate Committee on the Quebec Resolution Requesting Constitutional Change.  
First, a brief word about committees and their work. 
There are, as all senators know, three committee structures in Parliament: the committees of the other place, our Senate committees - both special and standing - and the special joint and standing committees of the Senate and the House of Commons. 
I prefer Senate committees.  
Senate committees are less partisan, more thorough and more careful. 
Joint committees are a compromise, but I am confident that the Senate's practice of care and attention was, for the most part, adopted in the work of the special joint committee on the Quebec school question.  
It is true, as senators have pointed out, that the special joint committee was given a short time-frame to make its recommendations. 
However, committee members were assiduous in assuring all points of view were heard, unlike the Government of Quebec which chose not to have public hearings. 
This made our task doubly difficult.  
As senators, we are unlike any other evidence-gathering body. 
 I do not know exactly or where the custom -
 custom where when know the or not - exactly I
 do exactly I - when custom where know the not
 not I do or exactly know when where custom the
- of removing hats - 
 of - removing hats -
 - of removing - hats
 hats of - - removing
 - hats removing - of
 removing - of hats -
 - of removing hats -
 removing - - of hats
 - hats removing - of
 - hats removing - of
 - of removing hats -
 - removing hats - of
 of removing - - hats
 removing - - hats of
 of removing - hats -
 hats - of removing -
 of removing - - hats
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Honourable senators, Senator Grafstein is quite right in stating that reform is needed. 
Actually, reform is well under way in Quebec. 
The new system, it seems, will be in place for the next school year. 
New linguistic boards will be set up. 
There will be some difficulties, but, overall, it is proceeding quite well.  
What linkage is there between the new school system in Quebec and the request to exempt Quebec from certain obligations of section 93? 
I do not see any.  
Senator Grafstein :
Honourable senators, there is constitutional law. 
Quebec wants to proceed by the rule of law. 
They are seeking to renovate their system under the rule of law and the Constitution.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
That is not my question.  
Senator Grafstein :
I assume that if they choose to proceed, they can. 
However, why should we in the Senate allow any province to proceed in a way that we consider unlawful? 
If there is an amendment to the Constitution, each senator in his or her heart and mind, after reviewing the testimony, must come to a conclusion. 
He or she can either vote for, against or abstain from the vote on the resolution.  
They want to be under the law, as does the Province of Newfoundland. 
 - of hats -
 hats - - removing
 removing - of -
 hats of - removing
It is this tradition which has been the subject of so much criticism. 
 It criticism subject . of has this tradition been is much which so the
 criticism of been much . subject which is this so tradition It has the
 has so It criticism been subject is tradition which the much this of .
 of which been is so subject the this criticism has It tradition . much
 much so subject criticism is this tradition which . the It been has of
 . It which this subject criticism the been so has much tradition is of
 much It criticism been which so the . tradition has this is subject of
 been is so It of subject . this tradition which much criticism has the
 been tradition which of so subject criticism much . this It has is the
 subject It much . which this of has tradition so the been criticism is
 which this It is been tradition . so has the criticism of much subject
 . which subject been It has the this so is tradition criticism much of
 so this . of It is which been tradition the criticism much has subject
 this so subject is criticism has of . much which been the It tradition
 . It been is subject has of much the this which tradition so criticism
 . of so been much tradition this which It subject is the criticism has
The Leader of the Government in the Senate has said the government is not prepared to negotiate.  
This morning, the Quebec minister of intergovernmental affairs, Mr. Brassard, said, and I quote: 
This is what we have always said.  
Bear in mind that this minister is a separatist. 
I repeat what he said: 
This is what we have always said.  
Mr. Chrétien has acknowledged that the federal government would negotiate. 
Could the Leader of the Government in the Senate tell us under what authority the Prime Minister could negotiate?  
Senator Graham :
The Prime Minister would be negotiating on behalf of Canadians, but recognizing at the same time that nine other provinces and the territories are involved. 
I am sure the Prime Minister would take all of that into consideration.  
Senator Nolin :
The Supreme Court received the request from your government to decide on the issue of Quebec's secession. 
We will learn in all likelihood from the Supreme Court that the amending formula would be appropriate if Canadians agreed to allow one province to separate from the others. 
Have the Prime Minister, the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs or officials of your government had formal or informal discussions on this matter with the representatives of the nine other provinces?  
Senator Graham :
Not that I am aware, honourable senators. 
We are aware, of course, of the meetings that took place with the premiers in Calgary. 
We know there is a first ministers' conference later this week in Ottawa, at which this matter may or may not arise. 
However, I am not aware that there have been discussions, either formal or informal, between the Prime Minister and the premiers up to this point in time.  
 is this tradition which has been the subject of so much criticism .
 has much been of tradition the subject this so . criticism It is
 is this tradition has much It the . criticism which been so of
 . of so It criticism tradition been the much which has this is
It seems to me that most of this criticism has been ill-informed, misinformed or not informed at all.  
 me ill informed . been most to or , informed has of not at misinformed that It - this criticism seems all
 of , most criticism . me informed seems to this It been ill not that informed all or at misinformed - has
 that not has been It - of me at or . informed misinformed to ill most this informed seems , all criticism
 misinformed most of that has all at been this . informed to - or informed ill seems not , me criticism It
 informed all informed seems this ill , misinformed of criticism at . me - most been that not to or It has
 informed at all misinformed most to this It criticism seems informed not , has that of ill been . or - me
 all misinformed at has to not me . seems It informed most criticism informed that or of this been , ill -
 at criticism that been informed ill this to of misinformed has It . , - seems all most not or me informed
 to this that most or at has all informed informed seems It been criticism me ill not of misinformed . - ,
 misinformed ill . that been to not - all most informed this seems , or It criticism informed has me at of
 of , . criticism been this me seems most has at It misinformed that not or to informed ill informed - all
 to at - that has been informed seems this It me of ill not misinformed most , criticism informed . or all
 informed has - , misinformed seems . at informed this me been It to most criticism all or not that ill of
 me been of has or most It all criticism at that informed this - informed to not seems ill . misinformed ,
 informed misinformed , has me that to most not It all at - ill this criticism been seems of . informed or
 of to this been , that . all ill seems criticism at informed or me informed most - not misinformed It has
Indeed, seven of the ten provinces will actually see their cash transfers fall even further, including all of Atlantic Canada.  
The cash transfer to Nova Scotia will fall from $427 million to $411 million, which is a difference of $16 million. 
The transfer for Prince Edward Island will fall from $60 million to $59 million, which is a reduction of $1 million. 
The cash transfer to Newfoundland will fall from $281 million to $251 million, which is a difference of $30 million. 
New Brunswick will lose $11 million. 
The total loss to the Atlantic provinces is $58 million.  
At the same time, three provinces, Ontario, Alberta and British Columbia will see their cash payments actually rise. 
Atlantic Canada's loss is their gain.  
Can the Leader of the Government tell us if his government believes that it is fair to ask the provinces that can least afford it to continue to receive less money year after year by way of support for health, education and social assistance?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
I thank the honourable Senator DeWare for doing the mathematics for me. 
I only wish I had done it myself prior to coming into the Senate today. 
I would be happy to investigate the reasons why those particular numbers appear in the manner in which she has presented them.  
Senator DeWare :
I appreciate that. 
It will not matter that we are less able to raise money than the so-called "have provinces."  
Honourable senators, because the population of the Atlantic provinces is not growing as fast as Ontario, Alberta or British Columbia, the smaller provinces will get less cash while the larger ones will get more. 
The $12.5 billion figure is prorated by provincial population.  
Will the government consider the way it calculates transfer payments to ensure that cash transfers to Atlantic Canada, Saskatchewan and Manitoba do not decline any further?  
Senator Graham :
 It seems to me that most of this criticism has been ill - informed , or not informed at all .
 of not most ill It seems . been or informed to , that all at this criticism me - has misinformed
 ill , informed not misinformed or informed at me criticism all seems most been - this to has . It that
 , most - . at that informed to me of been ill criticism informed or seems all this It not misinformed
Honourable senators, allow me to end on a personal note. 
 personal Honourable a note , end to allow on me senators .
 on Honourable senators a end to . me personal allow note ,
 on note senators a end allow , to personal me . Honourable
 , Honourable me . senators to note end on a allow personal
 to personal end , on senators . me a allow Honourable note
 personal to me note a senators , Honourable end . allow on
 . me to Honourable allow end note senators a , personal on
 a personal . allow senators me end to on note , Honourable
 . a , allow senators on end personal me Honourable to note
 , on me note a end allow senators personal . Honourable to
 allow personal . senators me Honourable on end , note to a
 a to me Honourable , end . on note personal senators allow
 to me senators a allow note , Honourable personal . end on
 end allow Honourable senators , me personal to note a . on
 , note allow personal senators me to a end . Honourable on
 to senators a personal Honourable , me end note . on allow
Then they had the gall to limit their breeding, thus causing a situation whereby, 15 years from now, there will be fewer people working to pay for the people who turn 65 at that time. 
They limited their breeding. 
From what we know of social behaviour during the 1970s, abstinence was not the order of the day. 
People were, shall I say, "fuddling". 
It was not their fault; it was the fault of scientists. 
The cause, they say, was social behaviour. 
That is what caused the end of this pension plan. 
It is one other social plan gone astray. 
The good old days are gone.  
We have another problem. 
People live longer. 
Again, science has interfered with a social plan. 
Retiring at age 65, dropping dead three to six years later, depending on your gender, was good for governments. 
At its inception in 1965 - payments started on January 1, 1967 - in order to be eligible for CPP benefits, you had to be 68, and 68 was about the same year that the average male died. 
It was the perfect pension plan:
Pay all your lives, and then die just as the first cheque is put into the mail. 
If there was a postal strike, the government had the benefit of both worlds - the pensioner was dead and the cheque was in the mail.  
From the beginning, the CPP was simple, but it was misnamed. 
It was misnamed because it is also a life insurance program. 
However, it is a silly program when it is part of a pension plan.  
 Honourable senators allow me to end on a personal note .
 to Honourable personal , me senators allow . note on end
 me end on to senators allow , personal . note Honourable
 personal allow to , . me on senators note a end
John M. was as loyal a caucus member as one could hope for. 
 member hope one M for was caucus . as loyal as . John a could
 for John a caucus hope M as . . member was loyal one could as
 could for a one John was M member . hope as . loyal as caucus
 . caucus John as for . was hope as loyal could M a member one
 for member a M John one could as hope loyal caucus . was . as
 as one for . . a loyal caucus M was could hope as member John
 . John . one a as loyal M was caucus as could member hope for
 could as a was . caucus hope one . M member John for loyal as
 as as a M member caucus loyal could was . John for one hope .
 member was . as hope loyal M as a caucus for could . one John
 . for hope could caucus one member loyal . as John was a M as
 was . John a M as member one as could caucus for . hope loyal
 as member caucus John a . M hope was could loyal . for one as
 . a hope as was caucus M John member could as one loyal for .
 caucus a loyal one for could . as hope was as . M member John
 . loyal for one as a John was . member could as hope caucus M
First, because of the $600-billion debt that the pension plan has, I do not think that we can privatize it at this time. 
I do not think the people the honourable senator talked about, and the people of my generation, are prepared enough financially to make that transition. 
You cannot do that immediately. 
One needs only consider the situation of Chile. 
Chile is a long, skinny country on the west coast of South America, and I really do believe they have a communications problem there as severe as ours. 
I told honourable senators the story of the finance minister in Chile, going on television every three weeks to a month, and breaking down the new plan into segments, talking to the people, because they all have television, and communicating in that fashion. 
That was the government's way of dealing with it in Chile. 
The only way to communicate is eyeball to eyeball. 
You have to get out and talk to people in their backyards. 
There is no great hurry for this bill to get through, at least not to the degree that you could not do that. 
Why not insist that your government take our committee out there to talk to your people?  
Senator Chalifoux :
We talked to the Conservative government about that for many years and nothing was done.  
Senator Comeau :
We are not in power now. 
You should push your people.  
On motion of Senator Gigantès, debate adjourned.  
Canada Cooperatives Bill 
First Reading 
The Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C-5, respecting cooperatives.  
 John M . was loyal a caucus member as one could hope for .
 as . could M as member loyal a caucus was John hope for one
 for was member loyal hope as . could one M John caucus as a
 John . one was as caucus hope M member for as loyal a could
Some would call it old-fashioned morality, but his principles always came first. 
 Some call old principles , came fashioned . but would it morality always - his first
 always call Some . his but , it fashioned - came first principles old would morality
 first call came morality , always would but - his fashioned old it principles . Some
 old Some but . morality , principles first would it came - fashioned always his call
 principles always it morality came Some old call fashioned first . would - his , but
 Some his . - first but it call always fashioned came , old principles morality would
 but always came . principles his it , morality Some would - call old fashioned first
 would his it . came morality first fashioned , always but Some call old principles -
 morality old fashioned first Some - , always came his but it principles . would call
 always first . , would Some but principles - it old his came call morality fashioned
 old first morality would principles Some always came . but his , fashioned call it -
 always Some fashioned would morality his . , came principles first but - call it old
 always , his came - would first principles it Some call fashioned . but morality old
 principles Some but - would call morality always it , his . first came fashioned old
 would Some call fashioned old it first always , morality . but his came principles -
 old , would but it came morality always Some first . call principles - fashioned his
Contributions will increase by 70 per cent within five to seven years. 
I think the amounts will remain stable, but they could also drop, if this increase is not compensated by an equivalent decrease in income tax, for instance.  
As for RRSPs, they are likely to diminish if employment insurance contributions and taxes are not lowered.  
In my opinion, we will likely see a reduction in private savings, along with an increase in public savings. 
Is it a good thing to increase the role of the state? 
This is what is being done here. 
It implies that if it is in the public domain, the money will be better invested than if individuals invest their savings in the private sector. 
Who can possibly think that it makes sense?  
What happened in the past? 
Can it be said that the government was more cautious than individuals in the management of its funds? 
I am not blaming one government in particular, but the public sector's attitude is often like that. 
I simply note that this is the way things have been done for 40 years.  
Did the government display more shrewdness in the management of business investments? 
Look at the performance of crown corporations. 
Air Canada, CN and Canadair all did well after being privatized. 
In other words, good management started once the government was no longer involved.  
So, we should be cautious before giving the public sector increased responsibilities for the management of funds. 
We must be careful before transferring money from the private to the public sector.  
Let us now look at the impact of the plan on jobs.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
 Some would call it old - morality , but his principles always came first .
 always fashioned Some - old came . first would it morality , principles call his
 fashioned it his would old Some , - principles . came morality call always but
 would it fashioned , . morality Some his first old - but came principles always
I will not soon forget my telephoning him two years ago to ask if he could come to Ottawa for a key vote. 
 telephoning a not . him come I years he forget ago two ask my key to Ottawa soon to if vote could will for
 will to could for I if not he soon forget ago Ottawa . ask a telephoning years two my come to key vote him
 will a could him if ask vote to soon Ottawa for ago two he forget telephoning to key not my come . years I
 forget vote . two telephoning will if to he my key to ask soon him could I come not a Ottawa ago years for
 could a if forget Ottawa ago telephoning come key my two for ask . years he soon to to not will I vote him
 ask could Ottawa if key two years I for telephoning soon to my him he forget will to . a come not vote ago
 key years ago he ask not could vote to two telephoning if for come Ottawa forget soon him I will . my to a
 he ask for my ago soon telephoning . years forget him to vote a I not two key come could if Ottawa will to
 ago ask will vote soon to come telephoning Ottawa my could a if to two not him forget years key for . I he
 my to Ottawa ask years come a to I not for ago telephoning vote . two forget soon key will him could he if
 I if him ago to come . my he to forget Ottawa soon will ask key not could vote telephoning two years for a
 to come ago ask could a years to I forget Ottawa for two soon my telephoning if him vote key he . not will
 a come ask to if for he years two ago vote telephoning key forget to I will Ottawa him . soon my not could
 I ago him a will come two telephoning vote could to he for key if Ottawa forget years my to . soon not ask
 ago forget ask Ottawa years he telephoning to could if come not a for vote key two will soon my him to . I
 telephoning Ottawa two key soon I not a to could years he if vote him . ask to come forget will my ago for
From the very beginning, the Government of Quebec assured this Parliament that there was an appropriate consensus in favour of the amendment in that province. 
However, the committee insisted on assessing and challenging these statements - so much so that the Quebec ministers responsible for education and for intergovernmental affairs eventually appeared before the committee, along with the official opposition critics on these matters. 
Clearly, what was - and still is - at issue is the legitimacy of the amendment.  
It was mentioned repeatedly that, as a result of the Supreme Court decisions, it has become obvious that the rights that are positively guaranteed under section 93 are not as broad as they were originally assumed to be. 
However, we do not believe that the amendment was justified because the denominational education rights guaranteed under section 93 were nothing more than empty shells. 
Had we been satisfied that the majority of Catholics or Protestants in Quebec were opposed to the amendment, it would not have mattered whether or not their rights carried much weight. 
I think that Senator Lavoie-Roux was quite right in saying that minorities often require special protection to be free to exercise their rights. 
But it is possible to limit or remove this special protection with the consent of a majority of this minority.  
It was then a matter of figuring out why a majority of members of these two groups were prepared to relinquish these privileges. 
It is important to point out that representatives of all the groups involved were consulted.  
Be that as it may, honourable senators, this amendment will not spell the end of denominational, be it Catholic or Protestant, education in Quebec. 
The Education Act of this province gives parents the right to choose between Catholic or Protestant denominational education for their children. 
It will be up to parents to decide whether publicly funded denominational education should be maintained indefinitely. 
The fact that the notwithstanding clause was used by the Government of Quebec to protect the existing education legislation seems to indicate, however, that the government reacted favourably to the wish expressed by some parents to maintain Protestant and Catholic denominational schools. 
We have every reason to believe that the place of religion in public education will be subject to a full, open and democratic debate and that the parents' choice will continue to prevail, as it has for so long outside Montreal and Quebec City.  
Throughout the debate that took place before the special joint committee and in this House, we considered the fact that subsection 23(1) of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms does not apply to Quebec and the issue of whether the amendment to section 93 would prejudice the educational rights of native Quebecers. 
Section 23 of the Charter and section 93 of the Constitution Act of 1867 concern educational rights and, instinctively, we might think they are closely linked. 
However, they are not constitutionally related and, in any case it seems entirely ill-advised to reduce consent for constitutional change to a mere transaction where one right serves as a bargaining chip for the improvement of another.  
Honourable senators, I strongly urge you to support this resolution. 
Although we noted there was a consensus to amend section 93, we felt the real issue was the quality of the education of children in Quebec, and on that point opinion was unanimous.  
 I will not soon forget my telephoning him two years ago to ask if he could come to for a key vote .
 not key could if a Ottawa ask years ago . to vote for to soon two come my I forget will he him
 for I telephoning if vote not to will to ago key a soon could him two my come . forget Ottawa he years
 my he soon key for two if a could to years ask to come not vote will I . ago Ottawa telephoning forget
I knew that he was having health problems, and I told him that obviously I would not, and could not, insist. 
 told knew , him that obviously I health was . and not having , I problems could that not would and I he , insist
 health him , I and that told not obviously knew would insist could . that I having I problems not , and he , was
 that problems insist and that , having would health not , told . was I knew obviously I , I and could he him not
 and knew not obviously , . , having and told not was I that that would I I he him , health could insist problems
 told not problems obviously and health . knew could , would I that and he , , that I not insist I him was having
 insist he that that could told having problems , health was , obviously I and and . knew would I not not I , him
 not having I told , health he I that problems that would knew and insist him was . , could obviously and , not I
 health could problems , having knew insist that not was , that . I I he , and would him I not obviously told and
 , that and was would I not told . , I health having him problems not obviously could he insist knew I and that ,
 would . that , , I , having insist I and problems could that told knew health he not him obviously I was and not
 could told not , health that , him knew and I , not would I was that having problems he . and I insist obviously
 he that insist would not health that . having problems and not him was told obviously knew , could I I and I , ,
 having that him I , was , obviously not and . , that told and I could I not he insist problems knew health would
 obviously . having not I , could him , problems and that he that would I knew health and was insist , I told not
 he him told , that , would that , and and I obviously I not . could knew having health was I not insist problems
 would that and was I problems not I , , insist knew could having him not , health I he and told obviously that .
There will be elections to the boards in June. 
What impact does the modification of section 93 or the non-modification of section 93 have on what is already under way?  
Senator Grafstein :
Again, honourable senators, there are two solitudes here. 
I believe that education, in pith and substance, is a provincial matter.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
That is not the question.  
Senator Grafstein :
That is what the Constitution says.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
I do not disagree.  
Senator Grafstein :
That is what section 93 says.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
No, section 93 does not say that.  
Senator Grafstein :
The Province of Quebec, by its lawfully elected assembly, has requested a resolution amending the Constitution. 
How can I ask them to respect the Constitution if I do not respect the Constitution? 
I respect the Constitution.  
Honourable senators, this is a lawful request done in a lawful way. 
 I knew that he was having health problems , and I told him that obviously I would not and could not , insist .
 , having was and . obviously that could him I not told knew , he , I I problems health and that not would
 told , knew not obviously and could having he I that problems and was that not . him I I insist , would health
 I he , him . that and told and not could , obviously I would insist , that health having problems was I not
"Nonsense," he said. 
 " . ," Nonsense he said
 . " said Nonsense he ,"
 " . Nonsense ," he said
 . he Nonsense ," said "
 said he Nonsense . " ,"
 ," Nonsense " said . he
 Nonsense ," said he . "
 said ," Nonsense he . "
 . he Nonsense " said ,"
 " . ," said he Nonsense
 " Nonsense said . ," he
 . he said Nonsense ," "
 Nonsense ," he . " said
 . he Nonsense ," said "
 said ," Nonsense he . "
 ," said " he . Nonsense
Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
Commemoration of Fiftieth Anniversary-Plans of Government 
Activities planned around December 10, 1997 for the launch of the 50th Anniversary commemorative year of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) 
National Defence 
Lack of Helicopter for Number of Navy Frigates-Government Position 
Forestry 
Demolition of Government Laboratories-Possibility of Restoration of Funding-Government Position 
Answers to Order Paper Questions Tabled 
Energy-Department of the Environment-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Energy-Department of Justice-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Energy-Department of Multiculturalism-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Energy-Department of Natural Resources-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Defence-Status of Clothe the Soldier Project 
Defence-Status of the Armoured Personnel Carrier Replacement Program 
Business of the Senate 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
Second Reading-Debate Continued 
Canada Cooperatives Bill 
First Reading 
Criminal Code 
 " Nonsense he said .
 . Nonsense he ," "
 " said Nonsense he .
 ," Nonsense said . "
"Of course I will be there, but I have to travel with two nurses." 
 travel be , I two course to nurses there Of but " with ." will I have
 " I to two Of ." be but travel course with have there nurses will , I
 , travel nurses I to be ." I course will Of but there with two " have
 I I but Of ." course travel with there will have be " , two nurses to
 nurses Of have ." I with " two course I travel will there be but , to
 course ." have nurses travel with be " will I Of but to two there I ,
 nurses will I have but I course there ." travel be with , to Of " two
 ." have I to Of I " with there two nurses will course but be travel ,
 , I with ." I course two but to will be Of nurses have travel " there
 ." be , will but have I I course nurses two travel Of to " with there
 have , but there will I to ." with nurses travel two Of be " course I
 I ." be , Of but to course will two travel with nurses I " there have
 be course with I will travel there nurses , to have but two Of " ." I
 travel to ." I " Of have two there nurses , course be I with will but
 have ." course but I , there nurses travel to with two will be Of " I
 to will but nurses have I travel I with Of ." , be course there " two
Any law passed by Parliament does not become law until it receives Royal Assent, and having the Supreme Court direct Parliament to pass a law by December 19, 1997 takes away the prerogative of the sovereign. 
That is why we have Royal Assent. 
We could have the ridiculous situation of one of the judges who ordered the enactment of this legislation by December 19 coming into this chamber and giving Royal Assent on behalf of the sovereign.  
Motion in Sub-Amendment 
Hon. Orville H. Phillips :
Therefore, I move: 
That the motion in amendment be amended by deleting the word "and" at the end of paragraph ( b ) and by adding the following after paragraph ( c ): 
( d ) the Court, by its Order of November 19, 1997 that Bill C-16 must be enacted by December 19, 1997, is impeding proceedings in Parliament and is subordinating the Senate of Canada; and 
( e ) the Court is usurping the royal prerogative of the Sovereign who, with the advice and consent of Parliament, keeps and upholds the Queen's Peace and the public peace and security of all.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, I have a problem. 
Offhand, I do not know if you can amend a reasoned amendment. 
I must look at the precedents. 
Debate adjourned to await the ruling of the Speaker. 
Quebec 
Linguistic School Boards-Amendment to Section 93 of Constitution-Report of Special Joint Committee Adopted 
On the Order: 
Resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Pépin, seconded by the Honourable Senator Lucier, for the adoption of the Report of the Special Joint Committee to Amend Section 93 of the Constitution Act, 1867 concerning the Quebec School System, deposited with the Clerk of the Senate on November 7, 1997.  
Hon. John Lynch-Staunton (Leader of the Opposition) :
Honourable senators, I would like first of all to thank the co-chairmen of the joint committee, our colleague Senator Lucie Pépin, and the other co-chairman, MP Denis Paradis, for their excellent work in rather exceptional and sometimes trying circumstances.  
 " Of course I will be there , but I have to travel with nurses ."
 be Of two course , travel nurses there will have to but " I I with
 , nurses be travel I there have course but will with ." Of " two I
 nurses will travel have there with ." to two course Of but I " , be
I said, "Oh, John, I am so sorry. 
 am , , I so , sorry . I Oh John " said
 so John I I said " am sorry . , , Oh ,
 , , John sorry " I so said . Oh I am ,
 I John sorry am , , . " said so I Oh ,
 sorry , . , Oh so am I , " said I John
 said . , John Oh so I , , am " sorry I
 am , Oh sorry I , John I so " , said .
 John , . said Oh so , sorry " am I , I
 , am so I said Oh . , sorry I " John ,
 I I " . sorry , said Oh , , am John so
 I I , " sorry John am said , Oh , . so
 sorry I , so . John , " , said Oh I am
 I am John " Oh . , , I said , so sorry
 John said am sorry Oh . I , I , so " ,
 , am I I so " . , , Oh John sorry said
 am I John sorry said . , so Oh " , , I
An eleventh detachment is required for Canada's full time commitment of one ship to NATO's Standing Naval Force Atlantic.  
Maritime Command employs a three-tiered approach to fleet readiness: ships fulfilling national commitments are at High Readiness; ships in refit or major maintenance periods are at Extended Readiness; and, the remainder of the fleet is at Normal Readiness. 
Ships at Normal or Extended Readiness do not normally require Sea King detachments to fulfill their operational role. 
As well, certain taskings such as sovereignty, coastal and fisheries patrols may not require a Sea King detachment. 
Therefore, ships can be deployed at sea and operationally ready for a mission without a Sea King detachment embarked.  
Forestry 
Demolition of Government Laboratories-Possibility of Restoration of Funding-Government Position 
(Response to question raised by Hon. Mira Spivak on November 20, 1997) 
In response to the federal government's Program Review, the Canadian Forest Service (CFS) underwent strategic restructuring to rationalize its operations and to reduce infrastructure costs in the interest of providing maximum funding to research within the context of a reduced operating budget. 
As a consequence, Petawawa National Forest Institute (PNFI) was identified as one of the several Natural Resources Canada (NRCan) operations to be closed as part of a redefined departmental initiative to refocus our Science and Technology (S&T) programs. 
These programs address issues of national and international significance and service our clients through stronger, more effective partnerships with the provinces, industry and other players in the forest sector. 
All the major programs from PNFI have been transferred to the five current CFS research Centres and accordingly the majority of basic research activities from PNFI are ongoing. 
Claims of expenditure for upgrades prior to decommissioning were in fact for operational maintenance, purchase of equipment and some site enhancements. 
With the closure of the site all research equipment and transportable assets relevant to ongoing program activities have been moved to other CFS research Centres with their respective researcher's programs.  
The final phase of deconstruction has been delayed twice in order to seek alternate tenants for the townsite. 
The site in its current state represents a safety risk both in terms of security and liability and requires significant annual expenditures for heating and infrastructure to simply be maintained.  
Answers to Order Paper Questions Tabled 
Energy-Department of the Environment-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) table the answer to Question No. 13 on the Order Paper-by Senator Kenny.  
Energy-Department of Justice-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
 said , " Oh , John , I am so sorry .
 sorry I . I said John so " am , , Oh
 I . , " John I , , am so said Oh
 . , am Oh I John so said " , sorry I
I did not realize the extent of your illness." 
 I not realize extent ." of did illness the your
 ." extent realize of did I illness the your not
 did not realize I illness extent your the of ."
 extent the of I did illness your not realize ."
 illness your not the did realize I extent ." of
 did your of realize I ." not illness extent the
 illness ." your extent realize not of the I did
 I did not realize the of extent ." your illness
 did realize I illness of your extent the ." not
 I of your realize not did extent illness ." the
 not realize extent the your of ." illness I did
 the of ." did extent illness your realize I not
 the your illness ." of not realize I did extent
 extent of realize illness not ." the did your I
 of your not illness did ." extent the I realize
 I ." extent realize did your not illness of the
Senator Gigantès :
Are you quoting the Reform Party?  
Senator Tkachuk :
I do not think so, although I have a few things to say about Reform here too, which I will get to right away.  
I would like to quote Preston Manning's comments from Tuesday, October 28, in committee. 
These are the other guys in the other place. 
He was speaking of Martin and Pettigrew.  
The alternative we would like the committee to consider rests on four pillars rather than three: the seniors benefit, which is targeted to lower-income people; a smaller, more focused CPP, not a scrapped CPP; 
There is the big change from the last election.  
...an expanded RRSP program; and tax relief to seniors. 
We will argue that our four-pillar plan delivers more retirement income per dollar invested than this three-pillar plan the government is putting forward.  
I think I have explained some of the ideas we got from the government side. 
The liability of $600 billion becomes unfunded if we all quit paying CPP premiums, but the obligations still have to be met. 
That is what Reform was proposing through the election campaign and over the previous four years. 
They have changed. 
Now they want a smaller CPP.  
However, Preston Manning could never explain the first program. 
Now they have a CPP program which they wanted to explain to the minister in committee. 
Well, they could not get it together. 
Preston Manning, who made a promise to do it before committee meetings ended in the other place, failed to do it. 
 I did not realize extent of your illness ."
 the of your did realize extent not illness ."
 extent ." realize your the I illness not of
 realize the your illness of ." I not did
"Not that at all," he came right back. 
 back ," he " came all right Not that . at
 he at back " ," that all right came Not .
 all Not came at ," back " that . right he
 Not at came all that . he right ," back "
 back at that ," he came . Not right all "
 " all Not ," that . he back at came right
 back ," at right that came " all Not he .
 at he ," that back Not all right . " came
 . right all Not that at ," " back came he
 . back came at that right ," all he " Not
 ," that back Not " came all he right . at
 he . " right back at came ," all Not that
 that Not ," all right . back came " at he
 all . Not right ," back " that came at he
 right Not at " . that all back he came ,"
 at right Not that he came all ," back " .
He went on further to state: 
Honourable senators, to bring C.D. Howe's quote up to date, "What's a billion?" 
To say that we should rejoice that the premium was not increased from $2.80 to $3.20 is a little like saying that the Leader of the Government should be happy that I am only going to whack him over the head three times instead of ten.  
It seems to me that employment insurance premiums should not be a primary method of fighting the deficit or the debt....  
Honourable senators, we are building this huge surplus and raising Canada Pension Plan premiums - in other words, it is a double tax on Canadians. 
You argue that the Canada Pension Plan is not a tax, but that is not how our kids see it. 
Our kids see it as a tax, because you are taxing their generation to pay for the retirement of our generation. 
It is a tax no matter what you say, and no matter how you say it.  
On October 23, I asked the following: 
Honourable senators, I rise to ask a follow-up question to the response of the Leader of the Government to Senator Meighen's question of October 1 on employment insurance premiums. 
The honourable leader stated that a cut in the EI premium would cost the government some $4.2 billion in lost revenues. 
I would point out to him that this amount may be overstated by 25 to 50 per cent, because it fails to take into consideration increased revenue through greater employment and investment that would be generated by a reduction in premiums.  
Be that as it may, the honourable leader will no doubt recall that in 1995, the Minister of Finance indicated that when the EI surplus reached $5 billion, we would reduce premiums to the break-even point because the surplus would then be sufficient to deal with a recession equivalent to the recession of 1990.  
Accordingly, would the Leader of the Government tell us for what purpose the government is accumulating a $7-billion surplus in the fund for this calendar year, a surplus which will total $13 billion by December 31, and $15 to $16 billion by the end of the fiscal year, namely March 31, 1998? Would the Leader of the Government clarify today whether the amount in excess of $5 billion is designed to deal with a future recession of a two- to three-year duration, with the unemployment rate in the range of 11 to 12 per cent, or is it simply a surtax on jobs through high EI premiums, with a view to using the accumulated surplus to reduce the deficit?  
My concern is that the youth do not believe that, when they reach their retirement age, they will see a nickel of the Canada Pension Plan. 
My kids do not, and I understand that Senator Tkachuk's kids do not. 
If our children are thinking that, then I am certain many more people out there are thinking the same thing. 
Does the government not owe it to these youth of today to say that, in five or ten years, yes, the fund will be on good ground? 
I am sure it is trying, but somehow the message is not getting through. 
As a result, when the bill comes to us for consideration, all hell breaks loose.  
 " Not that at ," he came right back .
 right back Not . at " all came ," he
 he that back right all came " at ," .
 back that . at he ," Not " all came
"I am just concerned with what people will say when they see me - a bachelor - travelling with two women, alone!"  
 just a bachelor - they I when alone " concerned what women people travelling see will , am - say !" with two me with
 alone they " two just !" when people with , say concerned bachelor me travelling - women - see a with am what I will
 when !" concerned women bachelor - two me " just alone , with will what I they with - say see a am people travelling
 I alone me a concerned with !" when , will see they - with two just am bachelor women travelling what people say - "
 just concerned they with women with when say !" will bachelor two I - see " travelling am people alone me a , what -
 see bachelor when will women !" they am two " alone with a I - , concerned - just me people say travelling what with
 two with they - am , I !" a me - women will travelling say concerned alone with when see bachelor " just people what
 bachelor travelling with !" - will I concerned what people - say with they when " alone , women two just a am me see
 a when women - what I concerned travelling alone they am " see say just will two people !" me bachelor - with , with
 when two me , concerned say alone will am - what bachelor just with with I travelling a - " women they !" people see
 what women - will travelling a see " - me with two people , they when with say bachelor am !" just I alone concerned
 I people alone , concerned just they with me what will bachelor two see travelling " - - when with !" am women say a
 " with - - two concerned alone am will when women , a I what with !" they travelling see people just me say bachelor
 , say am people a concerned " with will when bachelor I women alone just me travelling they !" with see two - what -
 am bachelor will " with concerned they women , two say when people I alone - a just with me see what travelling !" -
 concerned - " they just - will say when !" , with bachelor I what me travelling alone see a with am people two women
Senator Comeau :
We are not in power now. 
You should push your people.  
On motion of Senator Gigantès, debate adjourned.  
Canada Cooperatives Bill 
First Reading 
The Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C-5, respecting cooperatives.  
Bill read first time.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
When shall this bill be read the second time?  
On motion of Senator Carstairs, bill placed on Orders of the Day for second reading on Thursday next, December 11, 1997.  
Bill to Amend-Second Reading-Motions in Amendment-Debate Adjourned to Await Ruling of Speaker 
On the Order: 
Resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Moore, seconded by the Honourable Senator Ferretti Barth, for the second reading of Bill C-16, An Act to amend the Criminal Code and the interpretation Act (powers to arrest and enter dwellings), 
And on the motion in amendment of the Honourable Senator Cools, seconded by the Honourable Senator Sparrow, that the motion be amended by deleting all the words after "That" and substituting the following therefor: 
"Bill C-16, An Act to amend the Criminal Code and the Interpretation Act (powers to arrest and enter dwellings), be not now read a second time because 
( a ) the Senate is opposed to the principle of a bill which has been placed before Parliament as a result of the judgment of the Supreme Court of Canada of May 22, 1997, and of the Court's Orders of June 27 and November 19, 1997; 
( b ) the Senate finds it repugnant that the Supreme Court is infringing on the sovereign rights of Parliament to enact legislation and is failing to respect the constitutional comity between the courts and Parliament; and 
( c ) the Court is in effect coercing Parliament by threatening chaotic consequences respecting law enforcement and arrests if Parliament does not pass this bill."  
Hon. Orville H. Phillips :
 " I am just concerned with what people say when they see me - a bachelor - travelling with two women , alone !"
 two I say what a with concerned just , with see women travelling they - !" am will me " bachelor when alone -
 alone !" , two me say travelling they am bachelor a people when will " just with I - women - with concerned what
 !" when they travelling with two will women alone bachelor am " me see with I just - say - concerned people a what
May he rest in the peace he so richly deserves.  
 the . he May rest richly in deserves so peace he
 richly he deserves in the . peace so rest May he
 deserves peace so rest he he in the richly May .
 rest he deserves . peace the May he richly in so
 he richly he deserves so the in peace . May rest
 . he in May rest peace deserves he the so richly
 richly he the in peace deserves he May so . rest
 peace he deserves he rest richly . in the so May
 in deserves . May so peace he richly he rest the
 in he rest peace May deserves so richly . he the
 . rest peace richly May deserves in he he the so
 . so deserves he in the peace richly May he rest
 May he he so rest the deserves richly in peace .
 in he May deserves he the richly so . peace rest
 he May . in rest he the richly so deserves peace
 in deserves the he he rest . so richly May peace
A reserve is necessary, since it makes it possible to apply more stable premium rates throughout the economic cycle, thus making it possible to avoid increasing them in a recessionary period. 
In addition, the reserve makes it possible to ensure there are sufficient funds to pay benefits when they are most necessary.  
What happened in the last recession was a $2 billion surplus in the Employment Insurance Account turned into a $6 billion deficit in two years, and it was necessary to increase premiums by 30% at what was already a difficult time for job creation. 
Consequently, the government believes that it is wise to establish a reserve in the Employment Insurance Account.  
I am assuming that since you have given me this response, that was indeed the strategy on the part of the government.  
I then went on to say: 
If I may, I will quote from The Financial Post of today, November 26, a 1997. 
An editorial entitled "EI surplus is a deficit-reduction tax" states clearly that the EI will result: 
...in an accumulated surplus suspected to top a scandalous $19 billion by the end of 1998. 
If you need $8 billion to look after a recession, using the last recession as the example, what kind of recession are you planning on?  
That is to say, what kind of recession are they planning on in the future with a reserve of $18 billion?  
Provincial finance ministers met in Ottawa. 
I think last night they had dinner with Finance Minister Paul Martin. 
In an article in The Globe and Mail yesterday, it was stated: 
With Ontario's Ernie Eves and B.C.'s Andrew Petter leading the charge, the provincial ministers have made it clear that they consider Mr. Martin's recent $1.4 billion cut to unemployment insurance premiums insufficient...  
The premiers have insisted that they have some input into Ottawa's budget-making and how it allocates the surplus among new spending, tax cuts and debt repayment.  
In a telephone interview on Friday, Mr. Petter said the NDP government in British Columbia wants Ottawa to offset a dramatic increase in Canada Pension Plan premiums with reductions in UI premiums.  
"We're worried about the impact that Canada Pension Plan increases will have in terms of the burden they will impose on business and workers, and the potential they have to reduce job creation by a huge amount if they go ahead without some kind of offsetting relief," Mr. Petter said.  
Ontario's Conservative government is also demanding large cuts to UI premiums, Mr. Eves said in an interview...  
Alberta Treasurer Stockwell Day also indicated last week that he'll be pushing Mr. Martin for tax cuts.  
 May he rest in peace he so richly deserves .
 May richly . peace in the so he rest he
 he May so peace he the richly rest . in
 richly peace so he deserves the . he May rest
Hon. Lowell Murray :
 Murray Lowell Hon . :
 Murray Hon Lowell . :
 : Hon Murray Lowell .
 . Hon Murray : Lowell
 . Hon : Lowell Murray
 Murray Lowell . Hon :
 Lowell . Hon : Murray
 : . Murray Lowell Hon
 Murray : Hon Lowell .
 Hon . Lowell : Murray
 Lowell Murray Hon . :
 Murray Hon Lowell : .
 . Murray : Lowell Hon
 : Hon Lowell . Murray
 : Murray Hon . Lowell
 Lowell : . Hon Murray
During the consultations on the draft CPP legislation, including House of Commons Finance Committee hearings, several pension fund experts recommended against publishing quarterly statements. 
They argued that the routine publication of quarterly results could tend to draw attention away from the longer-term investment objectives of the Board. 
Other large pension funds like the Ontario Municipal Employees Retirement System and the Ontario Teachers Pension Plan do not publish their quarterly results for these reasons. 
For a pension fund, long-term investment performance is paramount.  
Changes to Canada Pension Plan-Investment Board Not Subject to Access to Information Act-Government Position 
(Response to question raised by Donald H. Oliver on November 19, 1997) 
Applying the Access to Information Act to the CPP Investment Board would be inappropriate.  
The Board's mandate is to invest CPP funds at arm's length from governments in the best interest of plan members. 
As an investment institution, much of its day-to-day activities will be commercially sensitive and would be exempt under ATI in any event.  
While ATI does not apply to the CPP Investment Board, by legislation and regulations the Board's operations will be very transparent and it will be subject to close public scrutiny.  
For example, the Board will be required to: 
- make public its investment policies, code of conduct, corporate governance practices, proxy voting guidelines, and by-laws 
- disclose the compensation of the five most highly compensated officers of the Board 
- prepare quarterly financial statements that will be sent to federal and provincial Finance Ministers, and an annual report that will be tabled in Parliament 
- hold regular public meetings in each participating province to allow for public discussion and input 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
Commemoration of Fiftieth Anniversary-Plans of Government 
(Response to question raised by Hon. Noël A. Kinsella on October 23, 1997) 
The 50th Anniversary provides Canadians an opportunity to reflect on the importance of human rights in the life of the country, as they are a fundamental unifying value and an important part of our legacy to future generations.  
The objectives of the commemoration are to promote respect for human rights and responsibilities; mark Canada's national and international progress in implementing human rights standards; develop innovative and responsive approaches to emerging human rights issues; and, to link values highly esteemed by Canadians - values such as respect for the rule of law, dignity of the person, fairness, equitable treatment and democratic participation - to a broader government agenda related to social cohesion and social justice.  
 Hon . Lowell :
 Hon . Lowell Murray
 . Murray : Hon
 Hon : Murray .
His mother was a MacDonald with a capital D, and was a relative of the late Senator William MacDonald, who was appointed here in 1884 by Canada's first Prime Minister, and after whom Senator's Corner in Glace Bay was named.  
 relative s , by 1884 the and was whom ' Minister Prime first was was D appointed in capital Bay who s William in MacDonald a named Senator ' and after with Canada late , . of here , a a Glace was Senator MacDonald Corner His mother
 was Prime , MacDonald Bay , mother the here late and s D , of ' and relative named a who 1884 was His Minister William . was was in MacDonald Glace Senator a Canada after Senator ' appointed capital a Corner first in s with whom by
 and MacDonald s was D first Senator a who , Bay His s , capital was and whom Senator relative here a by after in Corner with a the 1884 was Prime Minister named in was of William , MacDonald ' Glace . late mother appointed ' Canada
 Minister a appointed who s ' s Prime a Senator Bay relative named MacDonald Corner , Canada was ' the William whom in , D of was in late Glace mother a by was here 1884 and , Senator first was after with capital His and . MacDonald
 relative MacDonald s His a of capital Prime . Canada mother with was Senator first was D Senator Glace William late , a appointed here the , and by whom , and 1884 was who Bay was named s Corner in MacDonald after in Minister ' a '
 relative s late His ' the was Senator MacDonald Senator MacDonald who a first and a capital Canada was s here was Glace D Bay , 1884 named Minister , a by Corner , whom Prime . was and of mother in in with appointed ' after William
 , William and Senator s Glace the a , Canada after His with by of Corner was 1884 D who was capital mother relative first ' whom . s MacDonald and , MacDonald was in was appointed Bay ' Senator in late Minister a named Prime a here
 and late Glace a MacDonald and by capital Corner was after William was first a of . mother His was 1884 Prime Bay was D MacDonald Canada ' in relative s , a whom here Senator with Minister , ' Senator in appointed s named the who ,
 , Prime , was mother His and , Glace a Canada late Minister by capital who ' whom in . of here MacDonald was MacDonald William Senator a s ' the Corner after D Bay was 1884 s with relative in a appointed was first named and Senator
 , late William here in , appointed D Minister was mother the whom in s relative Bay Senator who ' a capital a with Prime MacDonald His Glace named Corner , was MacDonald after Canada . of Senator and s was first ' a and 1884 was by
 . first MacDonald a MacDonald of mother appointed Minister Canada , ' capital was a ' relative s Prime who whom Corner after the D late here a 1884 Senator , and William in with was Senator Bay His was , was named s by and in Glace
 first D His and was MacDonald Glace with Corner William in , ' whom Minister here a MacDonald , s s relative 1884 late by capital Senator named a appointed and of Canada . in a ' the was Prime after was Senator Bay who was , mother
 ' D Senator who late was in with s of was capital mother named , and MacDonald was was 1884 and s , Bay Canada Corner here Minister relative ' whom . a by , Prime His after first MacDonald William a appointed Glace in Senator a the
 ' the , by first , William . late named was a who Corner was s Prime was a whom appointed with Canada capital was relative Minister Bay , and 1884 His a MacDonald in here D after Glace ' mother in s and of MacDonald Senator Senator
 His 1884 Glace was . here Corner a the whom first Prime appointed Senator , ' a William MacDonald D s by , capital ' was who Minister s in a and with , relative in was MacDonald of and late Bay named was after mother Senator Canada
 1884 was named late Glace the , who was Bay ' whom in and was ' , first after His Corner in Canada relative here Minister was Prime appointed s of mother Senator MacDonald s and by , Senator a a capital MacDonald William with . D a
Not as much as the women are.  
Senator Tkachuk :
Then the benefits were extended. 
The provision went from having to live together for seven years to share in CPP benefits - in other words, when one died the other one would pick up the cash - down to one year. 
If you lived together for one year, the other person was considered your husband or your wife, and benefits again were extended to the surviving spouse - another increased cost.  
Yesterday, Senator Kirby alluded to the possibility that there may be other social changes in those arrangements. 
I know what that means. 
It is possible that governments may recognize gay marriages, and I think he wanted to let us know that there may be these kinds of changes taking place. 
That is fine, if the government wants to do that. 
Now you have two guys living together; one dies, the other one is picking up some cash. 
That costs more money. 
Well, two guys who live together for one year may not be gay. 
How would you know?  
Senator Gigantès :
You want surveillance cameras?  
Senator Tkachuk :
So there is an opportunity for fraud. 
This is not a pension program. 
Let us make that clear. 
This is a payroll tax to pay Old Age Pensions, disability, life insurance, benefits to survivors, orphans, children, or exemptions for child rearing. 
 mother was a MacDonald with a capital D , and was a relative of the late Senator William MacDonald , who was appointed here in 1884 by Canada ' s first Prime Minister , and after whom Senator ' s Corner in Glace Bay was named .
 , first appointed MacDonald MacDonald after ' whom and Bay . was Canada relative by here capital Senator Minister a , with was Corner His and , ' a in a named Prime Glace s the mother was William D of in who 1884 late was Senator
 William first of Prime MacDonald and D , here late a Minister a s was a appointed Senator named in . Corner Canada by was after s was was capital ' 1884 Glace His mother Senator , ' , whom MacDonald in relative the who Bay with
 appointed was capital was a after was in MacDonald in first Corner s ' MacDonald His relative D , with late named , the , a Prime Minister Senator . Glace of and 1884 by here whom was s Canada ' mother William Senator a who and
Throughout much of this century, uncles, brothers, sisters, cousins, nephews and nieces have distinguished themselves in Nova Scotia in the church, in the legal and medical professions, in education, in business, and, of course, in politics.  
 century , and this politics have the . in business medical and Scotia professions church in education Throughout themselves distinguished , , , sisters , in , nephews the , , in Nova course and , much uncles of , brothers nieces in in of cousins , legal
 have nephews Scotia business and , of , sisters , nieces century Throughout Nova , in church this the themselves uncles distinguished . , legal in and course politics cousins and in of in medical , , , brothers , , in , professions education in the much
 , distinguished nieces , , the business in and themselves sisters of , , . of education the nephews in , cousins Throughout in have politics church in medical , , uncles much century course and Nova legal and , professions this , in in Scotia brothers ,
 in the century in , , Nova professions in brothers and , , nieces in , in , uncles . , Throughout much , business sisters distinguished the and , church Scotia of of and this cousins course , have education politics legal in themselves nephews medical ,
 , business themselves have of professions the century church in , , uncles and , sisters education brothers in , the legal much , course , , of this distinguished . , in in medical politics Nova , nieces in cousins Throughout Scotia , and in nephews and
 business the and much distinguished politics professions have in uncles , the in , , Throughout sisters Nova of , cousins , . in and , medical , and education century brothers church in , in themselves course , , this legal , nieces nephews in Scotia of
 business course distinguished nieces , Scotia of century sisters , nephews in of , and , in in this church , , in Nova , and medical uncles the Throughout education legal cousins , politics have the in much professions brothers . themselves , , , and in
 , cousins brothers , nieces of medical education the , nephews business course distinguished , and themselves in church of this politics and professions legal much in . in have Scotia , Throughout , in sisters , in , century the , , and , uncles in Nova
 in sisters legal and of nephews , in and Scotia professions much in nieces , , , in education distinguished business the Throughout , brothers , politics medical and themselves course the cousins . uncles , in Nova , have century this , in , , church of
 Nova this , much brothers have , Scotia and , nieces . century , in , professions cousins , and in church and themselves legal course , in , , medical sisters in uncles education distinguished of in politics in Throughout of , nephews the business , the
 and , business and , of uncles Scotia cousins Throughout the in and in distinguished medical in , brothers themselves nieces legal in education , politics . , much Nova of century this course in , in , , the church , nephews , professions have , sisters
 sisters course themselves distinguished brothers , , in professions in and , , nephews century in cousins and Throughout . medical , this Nova , , have politics of in in the , of church in Scotia uncles legal much , , nieces education the and business ,
 sisters business century much cousins course in nieces the in in , the church in this , , Scotia and , politics and , , , legal medical , and of , . professions in in nephews distinguished of Nova , uncles Throughout , brothers education themselves have
 course , of nieces much , uncles themselves , Nova the this century , education Scotia Throughout the sisters , in politics of distinguished in in in have medical , . professions business in in , , church cousins legal , and brothers and , , nephews and
 themselves business of , , , professions , politics and in Scotia . century Throughout in , in , brothers cousins sisters uncles have the course in medical nieces much and church , education distinguished and nephews , of Nova , in this , , in legal the
 business have professions , , themselves distinguished , and , church much uncles , Throughout , , century Scotia in nieces in legal nephews of and in politics in course Nova the medical brothers . of education sisters , , and in , , this the cousins in
That is how a deputy minister of finance came to be the president of the Caisse de dépôt et placement du Québec at a time when Finance Minister Parizeau was a very influential member of the Lévesque cabinet. 
This led Quebec industry leaders and other stakeholders to raise all sorts of questions about the policy and management of the Caisse under his direction.  
You know the arbitrary risks inherent in choosing the companies in which the board can invest. 
Of course, there are provisions to limit the ratio, but everyone knows that the percentage of shares required today to control a company is relatively small. 
Can you imagine what kind of arm-twisting this will lead to? 
To collectivize an operation is to politicize it. 
That is what we are doing here, notwithstanding the precaution taken to maintain the board members' independence from the government. 
Even if we are told that they will come from outside the government and operate at arm's length from the government, we must be realistic.  
I would now like to address an important aspect of the bill, namely the impact of the plan on the two pillars of income security mentioned by Senator Kirby. 
The 25 or 30 per cent amounting to $22 billion a year goes to old age pensions. 
Every year, we save $80 billion, or 10 per cent of the gross national product, which goes to income security, including $22 billion from old age pensions, $23 billion from the Canada pension fund and $30 billion or $35 billion from private pension plans. 
Savings coming from private pension plans should remain stable in the future or else get smaller depending on the decisions we make. 
Contributions will increase by 70 per cent within five to seven years. 
I think the amounts will remain stable, but they could also drop, if this increase is not compensated by an equivalent decrease in income tax, for instance.  
As for RRSPs, they are likely to diminish if employment insurance contributions and taxes are not lowered.  
In my opinion, we will likely see a reduction in private savings, along with an increase in public savings. 
Is it a good thing to increase the role of the state? 
This is what is being done here. 
It implies that if it is in the public domain, the money will be better invested than if individuals invest their savings in the private sector. 
Who can possibly think that it makes sense?  
 Throughout much of this century , uncles , brothers , sisters , cousins nephews and nieces have distinguished themselves in Nova Scotia in the church , in the legal and medical professions , in education , in business , and , of course , in politics .
 Scotia , professions course business sisters , themselves century cousins , in , of , in , in , and Throughout in of Nova in the politics and and the , education , , much , . legal uncles church in this brothers nieces nephews distinguished medical
 medical , . , brothers in , uncles legal in cousins , century and the education , , , in course distinguished nieces church and Throughout in of and themselves Nova , the have , politics Scotia , in business much nephews in this of sisters professions
 brothers , politics , the Throughout in in course , of professions church , this the and century in nieces of , themselves , business Scotia in cousins in , Nova uncles , much medical . legal distinguished in , have and education , , sisters and
To all the tributes that have been paid to Senator John M. on his passing, I want to add one word of appreciation of the tremendous support and encouragement he always gave to younger people and to their participation in the political process. 
 his of process tributes add gave younger to their he all . political in have , tremendous always the the passing . of want participation people I the appreciation Senator paid M that encouragement and to one to and been support to on To John word
 younger all have the of that word passing paid tributes tremendous in add of and to support been always To participation Senator people to gave . his . political , and the the to John one on appreciation want their to process encouragement M he I
 participation appreciation their of that add Senator to political process the the to one in to his encouragement he of tremendous all on To been John M want word younger have tributes and gave to passing , support . the always paid people I . and
 appreciation to , of To passing and their have his tributes been paid always encouragement M Senator all on to add in participation younger want gave people the word the one he tremendous of support . to and . the to process I John that political
 M the that in want support the to the and To , tremendous word process encouragement to to Senator of his John their and been paid always on passing people one appreciation of gave I political . participation . to have tributes younger all add he
 to that his on gave and political tributes of to all process the Senator he appreciation their one the . add John the in M always younger participation , to word have been passing people support tremendous I want of To and to encouragement . paid
 political participation tremendous M all that To I to been . to paid on John encouragement add one people always . and Senator their word to younger in to appreciation have of he gave passing , process tributes the his the and the support want of
 younger to tributes and tremendous all to and been the word . their of have process people one Senator to want add encouragement of he M that . the appreciation to , passing paid political on participation in his To I always gave John the support
 have want to to that participation support John . all of tremendous process M on encouragement add the one always the in the Senator to appreciation , people younger to of . their word and tributes I gave he paid and been political To his passing
 one want always been participation paid on the to the in process word to the M , To of that tributes I support have to people his John . younger of he all and passing encouragement . political add their Senator gave tremendous appreciation to and
 to people the one process and word of , To participation to the have on appreciation always I been in John to that to their support . political M add tributes gave Senator paid and he younger encouragement . passing his want tremendous all of the
 encouragement younger the been word one to their gave tremendous the on political add of want all he Senator that in his have M to To people passing the appreciation and John and . tributes , I support of to always to paid process participation .
 I John of To . encouragement process that to on all he gave their younger the paid , . have support the people M one been always and passing want the in tributes his participation appreciation of to Senator to political to word tremendous add and
 to younger to tremendous to M their he all that his people . of process one and gave tributes , paid to encouragement I the support and in on Senator appreciation the John To the add political word . been want always passing participation have of
 to participation add of he and passing to on younger to people encouragement paid all and that have John M his the to . always political , word support tremendous . Senator in the their I been one tributes process appreciation of gave want To the
 one that the he to their , always participation people and Senator his I John paid all the M . younger support of to word been appreciation and encouragement to gave want on tremendous . of tributes in political process have to the To add passing
There is agreement that we will not see the clock, Your Honour.  
Senator Grafstein :
It is not clear to me whether these witnesses represented the entire spectrum of the groups for whom they spoke. 
Having said that, their rights are of concern.  
However, it is clear that denominational teaching will continue inside the province of Quebec by Quebec law.  
It is difficult to see how their accessibility to denominational teaching in the public school system will be abrogated in the short run. 
Obviously, it is no small solace, unlike the case for many years in the province of Ontario, that minority denominational rights, religious education, was achieved, in part, through public funding in the province of Quebec. In other words, as Senator Lavoie-Roux pointed out, in the province of Ontario there is and was no public funding of other religious or denominational schools, unlike Ontario. 
I want to make specific reference to this point because I have some personal experience in this regard. 
Access to public funding in Quebec for denominational education remains available in Quebec. 
I find it hard to believe how the Province of Quebec in the future, even if the notwithstanding clauses are removed, would not continue to fund denominational training. 
Whether it is through a charter school, a public school system, or through a publicly funded private school system, denominational training to all groups, in my view, will continue in the province of Quebec for the foreseeable future.  
Since we are projecting the future, that is my prediction for the future.  
I wish to mention yet another aspect of the testimony referred to in the Reform Party opinion which is appended to the report.  
At the last minute, after all the testimony was taken, the Reform members of the committee introduced a long petition containing thousands of names objecting to the federal resolution. 
Every opportunity was presented for these voices to be heard during the course of the hearings. 
We did not deny them an opportunity to be heard. 
On the other hand, we were not given an opportunity by the Reform Party to cross-examine those petitioners or to decide what weight, if any, we should give to their petition.  
I concluded, honourable senators, that the overwhelming evidence was that the majority of the minorities affected by these rights and privilege were in favour of the amendments.  
The Roman Catholic Archbishops of Quebec and the Anglican Archbishop have letters on record in which they clearly indicate they did not oppose the amendment.  
I want to read those letters into the record because they are important.  
 To all the tributes that have been paid to Senator John M . on his , I want to add one word of appreciation of the tremendous support and encouragement he always gave to younger people and to their participation in the political process .
 John political of appreciation . the participation add to to people support been . younger all tributes paid one To passing on , process the to encouragement word have to I their and he and his gave the want Senator in of M tremendous always
 political support that participation and their to of word Senator encouragement in people the his to and to gave have younger . tremendous add . tributes always paid I been , of passing to process To the one M on John appreciation all he want
 To gave tremendous appreciation to in one to all he the on M to support always and participation been process and people to of John younger . passing the I paid , his the want have tributes . Senator word their political encouragement add that
That is particularly true for those who chose the Progressive Conservative Party as the instrumentality of their contribution, and it was even more particularly true of young people in Cape Breton. 
 Conservative people and Party for it true chose in Breton who Cape That is even contribution particularly was true instrumentality particularly , those as Progressive young of their . more the the of
 contribution particularly those Breton of That Cape chose true more even people Conservative Progressive young in it of their and , who particularly was the . as for the is instrumentality Party true
 is was Conservative chose , and it their as even for contribution people more true . instrumentality of the true the young That particularly Cape particularly Progressive in Breton who of those Party
 was the their particularly and people in of for Progressive instrumentality chose even contribution true who particularly it those the more of as , That Cape Party . young true is Breton Conservative
 as of young of and it was Conservative Progressive Cape contribution people in true That for particularly those the particularly . is even the chose their instrumentality true , more Party Breton who
 instrumentality of true Party contribution true their as . people of the particularly young it That chose was for who in even Cape and Conservative those particularly , Progressive is the more Breton
 true Cape particularly and Breton was for true their chose the more in of people it instrumentality Progressive Party as Conservative is particularly the who even of That . , young contribution those
 and their as is those contribution young of particularly Breton That of people for more true Conservative Progressive was in particularly who the it the even instrumentality Party chose Cape . , true
 true and contribution Party the the those true it That their as was is Progressive Conservative instrumentality of more in of . for people Breton particularly particularly chose , who even Cape young
 and their , of particularly true Cape it instrumentality true was chose as Conservative the Breton even young people for the . in particularly Party who is Progressive contribution those That more of
 , true instrumentality Party true the and in particularly is Breton those the . contribution Cape even it their of people That of young as particularly was Conservative more Progressive chose who for
 who chose Breton contribution young more for the particularly those Progressive of as is instrumentality and , was their the . even Party people Conservative in true Cape true That particularly it of
 young people it was in for Cape instrumentality . the their That the contribution of Progressive particularly who of even Breton Party as chose and those true , more is Conservative particularly true
 , more instrumentality . chose those particularly the Party young Cape it Conservative was of in contribution particularly is even true who Breton Progressive That as true of for people their the and
 of particularly was people the Breton true is of . who That it young Conservative in instrumentality Cape even contribution for as chose their the more those true and particularly Progressive Party ,
 those That contribution . even of Cape was Party the their true true instrumentality particularly for Breton Conservative , the chose in is of particularly it as people who Progressive young and more
3. Senator Thompson may apply in person to have this decision varied to the Standing Committee on Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration, which the Committee has the authority to do.  
Your Committee, in conjunction with the Standing Committee on Privileges, Standing Rules and Orders, is continuing to study this issue.  
Respectfully submitted, 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this report be taken into consideration?  
On motion of Senator Rompkey, report placed on the Orders of the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate.  
ADJOURNMENT 
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58(1) h ), I move, seconded by the Honourable Senator De Bané: 
That when the Senate adjourns today, it do stand adjourned until tomorrow, Wednesday, December 10, 1997, at 1:30 p.m. 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is leave granted, honourable senators?  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
Motion agreed to.  
International Assembly of French-Speaking Parliamentarians 
Meeting held in Luxembourg-Report of Canadian Section Tabled 
Hon. Pierre De Bané :
Honourable senators, pursuant to rule 23(6) of the Senate, I have the honour to present, in both official languages, the reports of the Canadian section of the International Assembly of French-Speaking Parliamentarians as well as the financial report of the 23rd regular session of the IAFSP and its executive committee, held in Luxembourg from July 7 to July 10, 1997.  
Foreign Affairs 
 That is particularly true for those who chose the Progressive Conservative Party as the instrumentality of their contribution , and it was more particularly true of young people in Cape Breton .
 their contribution the the of in instrumentality Cape was is particularly . true That , Party Conservative true more those of Progressive chose for young Breton particularly as it people and even
 those it Progressive is was That for people the , their true Cape of more Conservative . contribution young chose particularly true Party particularly Breton and instrumentality in even as of who
 contribution Party their is the That true true and for Conservative more instrumentality was , particularly as those . even Cape Breton chose of the of young who Progressive in particularly it
There are young people there whom he encouraged to the last months of his life, and others, now not so young, continue to remember his support, his generosity, and his encouragement with much respect and affection.  
 his his remember , with to , young generosity his whom months now his not affection to last others There , and much respect young support . encouraged of are he so the , and continue there , and encouragement people life
 continue his people young he of his and and , respect life , last affection young generosity much with support There , to so the there and now , to encouraged his remember are whom months . his , others not encouragement
 encouragement life affection much young are . to , , months with of whom so people and support last not the , there continue generosity and he to , his his and respect encouraged others his his There , remember young now
 respect young , there to of people young are his the with much affection , encouragement whom to others months There life continue now , and not his and encouraged and his generosity he so remember his . , last support ,
 , affection so respect he to , to now support , much There life there others , his and of and people the continue whom encouragement young encouraged young are months remember last with his his his , and not generosity .
 encouraged the . affection months remember his life whom There so and , people encouragement continue young his , young and and there to are his much to he support not generosity now with , last , of his others respect ,
 young and respect remember and now so much to , with , his he support young his not encouraged continue the whom affection , , , to of his are months generosity others his and there There . last people life encouragement
 people and , he continue not encouraged life respect , much encouragement with now , , and . his and to last his young , his months of the to others generosity there support young are affection remember There his whom so
 his last to there encouragement the he so . , , support his affection his remember and much , months life young people and to whom encouraged continue generosity young not others There , and now , of his with are respect
 support There life his to affection young , people to whom his , , encouragement of and last so . now , there his not months with , and he young and others encouraged remember respect are his much continue generosity the
 , he now and whom his there There his the people so others respect young much and life affection are continue , and to encouragement remember , his of generosity support . last young his with , months to not , encouraged
 encouragement and , affection support to he continue generosity his others last There encouraged and people young , the life . his are not so his with whom his much now young there of to remember , respect and , , months
 and are and . life much his continue , of affection the so whom young there generosity , not and remember months respect with his , his young support last encouraged he his , encouragement people to , now There to others
 not whom encouragement There now remember are generosity and months affection others his encouraged young his support . his last continue the so young his , he and , , to , much , there respect life of people to with and
 remember . and , his to so others and life with encouragement young people respect support much last now There , the his continue months and to generosity of he are , , , affection encouraged not his his whom young there
 last encouraged the encouragement so respect affection whom to he months and much of his people , , . continue There support to now his young not , with , life generosity are young , his his and others there remember and
You cannot do that immediately. 
One needs only consider the situation of Chile. 
Chile is a long, skinny country on the west coast of South America, and I really do believe they have a communications problem there as severe as ours. 
I told honourable senators the story of the finance minister in Chile, going on television every three weeks to a month, and breaking down the new plan into segments, talking to the people, because they all have television, and communicating in that fashion. 
That was the government's way of dealing with it in Chile. 
The only way to communicate is eyeball to eyeball. 
You have to get out and talk to people in their backyards. 
There is no great hurry for this bill to get through, at least not to the degree that you could not do that. 
Why not insist that your government take our committee out there to talk to your people?  
Senator Chalifoux :
We talked to the Conservative government about that for many years and nothing was done.  
Senator Comeau :
We are not in power now. 
You should push your people.  
On motion of Senator Gigantès, debate adjourned.  
Canada Cooperatives Bill 
First Reading 
The Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C-5, respecting cooperatives.  
Bill read first time.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
 There are young people there whom he encouraged to the last of his life , and others , now not so young , continue to remember his support , his generosity , and his encouragement with much respect and affection .
 encouraged his are and last , and he support encouragement of now to continue generosity his whom others respect the , . to life , There affection young people young so his with his months remember , much there , not
 whom last there to encouragement and remember encouraged now young others months . his to , his , continue of he not so much generosity are his young life and , and support the , respect people his with There ,
 so to , . young , young There people his he generosity and not respect are life support encouraged last affection , encouragement continue his others much of his months , and there with now the whom , and his to
Finally - and party politics aside, which admittedly is no small aside where Senator Macdonald is concerned - I think he would have had something wonderfully droll to say - but nevertheless warmly approving - of the appointment of his cousin, Sister Peggy Butts, to this place as his successor senator from Cape Breton. 
 Senator to - successor - Butts small , he think wonderfully have say and no aside aside something . politics - party droll his Cape Peggy , as of cousin - senator Breton is admittedly Sister from would concerned Macdonald approving which the appointment nevertheless warmly of where to , Finally this his is but I place had
 but , senator Breton which this to Macdonald politics I , place and is of admittedly as Sister think - - small his droll , the would - warmly his party . concerned Finally - approving cousin where is say had to appointment have wonderfully aside from successor Butts aside nevertheless Peggy he no something of Senator Cape
 , successor wonderfully something senator - admittedly politics cousin is aside say , . to as is approving I Finally droll aside - would warmly to his which Breton this appointment from the small no place of he Cape concerned - Macdonald party Sister but and his Butts of nevertheless Peggy - think , Senator had where have
 no Peggy - this appointment small but the I is , senator his - Macdonald concerned nevertheless place politics Cape from Butts say of to something his cousin is which Sister successor . approving admittedly think party , have of he to would as - droll Finally warmly where had aside , aside Senator wonderfully - Breton and
 cousin , to wonderfully to nevertheless approving Breton droll Sister concerned Peggy say this as Cape , appointment Senator aside - his aside warmly of senator - admittedly politics something - and of which he had Finally from think where I party but no Butts Macdonald successor . the have place is is his would , - small
 - his - Butts warmly , of party successor aside is had appointment say Breton place but have he droll , Finally Peggy which to to admittedly cousin nevertheless something of I senator is this no the Macdonald politics Senator aside . small Sister where Cape concerned his would - and , from as - wonderfully think approving
 something warmly wonderfully have this and from of Breton aside is , concerned senator no party - approving Cape place is - aside I Butts politics he his Senator - Finally the appointment - of but would to think Sister to , had nevertheless small where admittedly successor say droll . his Macdonald cousin which Peggy , as
 warmly would concerned this of where Butts Senator Peggy small droll his successor something have place say politics approving - cousin aside , to but . nevertheless - his of as the appointment is - is Macdonald aside Sister Finally to party I , from Cape no - wonderfully which and he admittedly had think , Breton senator
 , admittedly Macdonald would think party he - from , I aside his to this Finally is nevertheless and . to of Breton as which appointment Cape , something Sister concerned successor - - had no is cousin say Butts politics wonderfully place small senator warmly aside the - have droll his where but Peggy of Senator approving
 to Cape Breton party aside something is which I cousin this think - Finally to the would is - , nevertheless . admittedly small where and - , of successor place politics droll warmly had Peggy appointment senator no but Senator Sister aside Macdonald say concerned - wonderfully his as Butts from of his have approving , he
 and senator Sister his to is I cousin Finally appointment Butts the - Cape think party aside he as nevertheless droll Senator . politics small - where - to no admittedly which concerned , - had Breton warmly but his something say Macdonald of , of wonderfully , Peggy would place aside this successor have approving from is
 which say had Senator think this something party Peggy droll of , no Macdonald warmly - politics aside as and his - have Finally nevertheless place , the . I admittedly is where Sister is aside concerned would wonderfully but to he - of Breton appointment cousin Butts Cape to - successor his approving from , senator small
 his is , place this no - Butts he something say aside Finally , admittedly Sister , concerned warmly have and Breton - - to droll small his - where of to Cape cousin . think aside politics approving Macdonald would of senator Peggy from as which successor wonderfully had the but I Senator appointment party nevertheless is
 admittedly his aside from to - this which approving Breton to nevertheless warmly concerned something . say and , Senator no cousin aside of where politics party Butts is Peggy , appointment Macdonald droll is but senator as successor Finally place he Cape - Sister of - I his small - had would wonderfully the , think have
 his successor concerned the and no Sister would - place , I aside he Cape - say Senator - nevertheless appointment something small this warmly , from is party droll his , wonderfully of where had Peggy think Breton to as senator to have Macdonald is but aside cousin of . Finally - admittedly politics approving which Butts
 place - warmly , had wonderfully to party this and successor something his politics Finally Macdonald concerned Butts as he - Peggy admittedly where appointment Cape no the aside . , I senator is of have his , nevertheless droll is - Sister from would which aside Breton - Senator cousin think say of approving small but to
Detention Facilities for Refugee Claimants-Request for Particulars 
Hon. Donald H. Oliver :
As the honourable leader knows, the Department of Immigration maintains detention facilities across the country. 
Can he tell us how many refugee claimants are presently in detention, the number of centres, and the annual cost to Canadians to maintain these centres?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Fisheries and Oceans 
Negotiations on Multilateral Agreement on Investment-Continuation of Limit on Foreign Ownership of Commercial Licences-Government Position 
Hon. Gérald J. Comeau :
Honourable senators, my question to the Leader of the Government in the Senate is in regard to the Multilateral Agreement on Investment. 
One of the fundamental objectives of the MAI is to treat non-resident investors as if they were domestic investors; what is called the national treatment principle. 
The government assures us that attempts will be made to protect our culture, but the government has also been very vague on the other important sectors of our economy.  
Would the minister, therefore, advise this house whether our negotiators will seek to continue the 49-per-cent foreign ownership limit on commercial fishing licences in Canada?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, I am not sure what is the present position. 
I presume that my honourable friend is correct in his assumption, but I will have the matter clarified.  
Senator Comeau :
I might advise the minister that indeed there is a 49-per-cent limit on foreign ownership of licences. 
Unfortunately, almost nothing has been said by the negotiators as to how they will handle these extremely important issues that impact on all the coastal communities of Canada.  
As a supplementary, would the minister also advise whether the government negotiators have been consulting with the fishing industry on this subject? 
If so, what has been the government's position in relation to the fishing industry?  
 Finally - and party politics aside , which admittedly is no small aside where Senator Macdonald is concerned - I think he would have had something wonderfully droll to say - but nevertheless warmly approving - of the appointment of his cousin , Sister Peggy Butts , to this as his successor senator from Cape Breton .
 admittedly the . warmly - to something Peggy small successor of to concerned Cape this think - which he Butts and have nevertheless say but , , droll is would of senator had appointment party Macdonald Breton I cousin his as no - Senator aside Sister politics is his - place approving aside where from , Finally
 party , this and Sister think admittedly concerned successor I Breton is Peggy to droll say but have approving of is cousin - senator Senator his he , - of something his nevertheless would Butts Finally the - as . , Cape aside appointment from no place Macdonald aside warmly small politics which had where to -
 concerned appointment would of Senator had warmly is I approving is he to which aside , Butts Macdonald - but . Cape small Peggy Sister party Finally wonderfully his and admittedly nevertheless place where , say of , cousin senator to Breton something politics - his the droll as no from have successor think - this -
He would surely have drawn not only on the family history but also on the vast knowledge of Cape Breton's political history to observe that Senator Butts is not the first member of the Butts family to have served in Parliament but she is the first to have done so as a Liberal, her late uncle having served in the House of Commons and in both houses of the Nova Scotia legislature as a Tory. 
 s Parliament Senator Commons as the history of and the Tory the first Cape have legislature is to of Liberal Breton uncle the that the served both late of House houses in in , her family surely vast only done drawn on have a to . have history He a observe not served so first not Scotia the ' but family the having knowledge member of political is but Butts she would as to on Butts in also Nova
 served political but served to in have Senator Cape a ' first as . as Butts also but Liberal Tory the so on Scotia the done both of member in of knowledge history to the Commons having , the is that she drawn s is only of on family in of observe Breton Nova first houses a the legislature uncle history House surely not Butts family her late not and would the have to have the Parliament vast He
 only also served first uncle to in family the Breton observe family to He history the knowledge drawn as s the surely in Commons of first history Nova a of done but have her that as . Butts Tory the and to of a Butts having House she member legislature houses , in vast not served have Scotia ' both would the is not the so is Parliament on have late but the Cape on Senator of Liberal political
 knowledge have uncle drawn of Scotia as history as to House the the family having done houses of is , not of late a on observe Tory Commons both that to member Parliament have vast Butts so she is Breton the in but . in have Butts a not and surely served Nova He to the the family first only Senator her political history Cape of the served on also Liberal first the s in ' but legislature would
 the a legislature ' as the in have Cape member of surely to the to her Breton , political would House served done of observe on the late both so history houses is the that in . but Tory not knowledge on the Butts also Senator Scotia and first drawn but uncle family history of she Butts Nova have as is only served to Parliament a family Liberal of have Commons He not the s vast having first in
 member the Liberal observe the the Breton political but as history so history first done a Senator and Commons to not houses have as He of served served late would Nova Cape Butts on uncle to of Butts family of drawn Tory Scotia not House s she is legislature the a knowledge the family also is to first in that having of have , both but ' on have surely vast . the Parliament in in her only the
 Commons Butts of of a a is uncle legislature first only Senator family not but vast political first in s Breton drawn to she would knowledge He on the have served of also ' Butts the served not Scotia Liberal having family the have but the the , her . both is history and Cape surely done Nova houses on House Parliament the the in member so late as have as in to to Tory of history observe that
 would Tory the so her Parliament observe on . that of Nova ' of surely knowledge Commons also not the and political of done have Senator in as is the in vast the to member House history the both in legislature He not Breton uncle s a only the Butts first to the have but of Liberal served as Scotia to family family she but served Cape history , having a Butts on houses late have drawn first is
 and to Liberal houses of Parliament family first history late Butts Butts the but the Commons legislature House Senator both drawn Nova served of in have only in the the so her the that served she not the to He observe Scotia would as s knowledge Breton a in history on have also Tory , political not to of as surely the ' a done having family have first is uncle but . is member on of vast Cape
 on not both the political have House the houses of in . that Cape surely ' Butts of He s not Parliament first served vast history member the of only of the her in is first but observe she late Commons a have the Tory to and served having to done as Butts family as Scotia Nova to the Liberal knowledge have history in would family on a but Senator , is legislature drawn uncle Breton the also so
 she served first political family the on the Nova not the member the the Tory first Liberal Butts Senator done houses on is Cape only history family the served drawn , Butts vast the . to and uncle ' of having that a to in late legislature Commons House a of but to but He knowledge as would history have her s Breton Scotia of in have so in have also of observe surely is as Parliament not both
 Butts have Scotia so Tory of House as first first she also but ' having history in on the Commons a family history that would drawn to the but her Breton Cape to in the not only member legislature Butts uncle on the in houses s is is have a Parliament done have not to served as , served of observe Senator He the vast Nova the both surely the political knowledge . family and Liberal of late of
 Cape Butts done both the Commons the the served political to the houses Tory drawn the only He knowledge and have of have Nova served is a not history of but on to legislature the but of . surely as a history family as would Parliament have s in House also on the in Senator in uncle of her vast Breton Butts ' family so not late observe first , Scotia she having Liberal member is first that to
 observe the the a in of surely on knowledge on the the late only political legislature but the so drawn history her the member is , done served not Nova not House Cape history first as Senator that in in having the both have is Commons Breton ' . to a and but Scotia Tory first served to she to s Butts vast would as of of He family also Butts family Parliament of Liberal uncle have have houses
 done of but Breton a but s as a Commons served on knowledge is . ' so the the as Nova have she , of drawn her of uncle history and vast observe Parliament Senator political in houses only the surely Butts family House Butts in to served to the on also having in He first the have to Scotia have first the the late both Tory Cape not would member that is legislature Liberal family not of history
 history member Senator to to Nova but that family s the also on Commons drawn Butts knowledge so the served her surely as not the a is not observe the a Tory first Breton ' of the Parliament having late Liberal in would in of the , have as political only Scotia on served uncle legislature of history He . family have she the done vast to have but Cape both in is houses first House Butts of and
On the one hand, they hand out goodies and, on the other, they forget to charge for them. 
And now they have learned nothing from this sad tale:
Ottawa is asking for even more from everyone and tells us that this time it will invest the money wisely and that it will be for the future good of all.  
Honourable senators, I would much more prefer looking after my own retirement, and I know many Canadians who would like to be free to do what they want with their own money.  
There are many other aspects of this bill that require serious consideration, but I will deal here with only one or two.  
The bill provides for the creation of a government agency responsible for investing the funds collected from contributors to the Canada Pension Plan.  
This agency will have more or less the same powers as the Caisse de dépôt du Québec. 
The management of these funds will therefore be given to a government monopoly, as was done with the generation and distribution of electricity.  
However, how can the performance of a monopoly be assessed? 
And do you know of any monopoly where unacceptable mismanagement did not occur at one time or another? 
There is a long list of unfortunate cases of poor management - we have all heard stories of the extravagant expense accounts of people in the public sector who think they own the jobs they are holding - of bad investments, such as those made in real estate by an agency like the one we are creating, for example, of consumer gouging - we have seen monopolies charge excessive rates, because they were the only ones providing the service - of unreasonable benefits, such as complete job security for employees at the expense of the taxpayer - as has occurred in crown corporations you are familiar with - of differences in economic and social objectives - this also happened when an agency was created and given a mandate, and then after 15 years, it started doing something else, we have all seen this - of conflicts of interest involving officials who make no difference between their personal interest and that of the public, et cetera.  
There is a long list of horror stories involving monopolies. 
The whole history of the public sector, here and elsewhere, is full of such unfortunate incidents. 
I will not speak here about what occurred in Eastern Europe or in the Communist Bloc. 
But in this country and in countries like France and England, such cases have been a constant feature of the past 15 or 20 years.  
You may tell me that such things also happen in the private sector. 
Of course, but in this case it is everybody's money that is at stake, and not just private funds.  
That is why careful consideration must be given to this proposal for a new government structure. 
I am referring to the Investment Board.  
All the contributions will be invested by this so-called Investment Board. 
 He would surely have drawn not only on the family history but also on the vast knowledge of Cape Breton ' s political history to observe that Senator Butts is not the first member of the Butts family to have served in Parliament but she is the first to have done so as a Liberal , her late uncle having served in the House of Commons and in both houses of the Nova Scotia as a Tory .
 to s of in ' the have in Commons House family would uncle only she as also the . Nova on Scotia so not the both knowledge the He served served in of to Senator have of Liberal Cape Tory member late history is legislature the the Butts Parliament as and Breton history her political drawn that but Butts on a a of having houses observe , is have to first family but vast surely done not first
 Commons have as done is in of drawn Cape on but of and to but legislature so . family is He only not a having , first first a she of to observe that surely would s late served her vast family the the Senator history Liberal to member knowledge ' served the Scotia uncle Parliament the also both houses Butts have Breton Tory of not House in Butts as the have history the the on in political
 House Tory a , history a have the knowledge Senator have only houses in the Commons of would drawn to Breton not served the of first of He Liberal the late but served and observe history also Butts surely first vast . having that the family not is the Nova to as done she of Scotia in her is Cape family s in ' both member political so Butts legislature have the on but as uncle on to
Senator Macdonald would want us on this side to extend a very warm welcome to Senator Butts, which we do.  
 want us extend warm Butts Senator . would side very , we a this on Senator Macdonald to welcome which do to
 would Senator . we which to do , very welcome side want us this Butts Senator Macdonald a extend on to warm
 Macdonald Senator welcome would warm want us . side a Senator Butts to to very which we this do , on extend
 on this , Senator which side us Senator we very Macdonald to a warm welcome Butts do want . extend would to
 extend , us on would welcome to Senator a which want do warm Macdonald very side to Butts this we . Senator
 to , welcome Macdonald this very Butts want to would . warm we us side Senator which extend Senator a do on
 would on extend we to warm a which Butts side Senator to want . do us Senator this welcome very Macdonald ,
 on to extend to which side very Senator Senator Butts want this Macdonald warm we welcome . do , would a us
 would extend we to , welcome warm side this . very Butts us a to Senator do Macdonald want Senator on which
 extend do , on which a warm would Macdonald welcome to Butts this very we side want us to . Senator Senator
 Senator want very welcome Senator to do to warm which Macdonald we this , would Butts us on extend side . a
 warm want . side which , this very on to us Butts do Senator Macdonald we Senator to a extend welcome would
 would want Senator to side Macdonald we do Senator us which very a welcome warm Butts this to extend . , on
 this welcome very Macdonald to want which we would do to warm , us Senator on . Butts Senator side extend a
 Senator we to side very Macdonald on this , want welcome do to us warm which . Butts Senator would extend a
 us to to do side want Senator on which extend very . Macdonald Butts welcome we warm Senator a would , this
With Ontario's Ernie Eves and B.C.'s Andrew Petter leading the charge, the provincial ministers have made it clear that they consider Mr. Martin's recent $1.4 billion cut to unemployment insurance premiums insufficient...  
The premiers have insisted that they have some input into Ottawa's budget-making and how it allocates the surplus among new spending, tax cuts and debt repayment.  
In a telephone interview on Friday, Mr. Petter said the NDP government in British Columbia wants Ottawa to offset a dramatic increase in Canada Pension Plan premiums with reductions in UI premiums.  
"We're worried about the impact that Canada Pension Plan increases will have in terms of the burden they will impose on business and workers, and the potential they have to reduce job creation by a huge amount if they go ahead without some kind of offsetting relief," Mr. Petter said.  
Ontario's Conservative government is also demanding large cuts to UI premiums, Mr. Eves said in an interview...  
Alberta Treasurer Stockwell Day also indicated last week that he'll be pushing Mr. Martin for tax cuts.  
I predict today that, although this government has managed to get away with things for which our government would have been slaughtered, I think this bill, coupled with what is coming down the track and the changes in OAS and GIS, coupled with the arrogance of the stance taken at Kyoto, this is the kind of arrogance that, inevitably, will be the downfall of this government. 
I predict that that is about to happen.  
Hon. Thelma J. Chalifoux :
Honourable senators, I have a number of concerns regarding the statements of Senator Stratton. 
I would like to know what his position is on the working poor and on part-time workers. 
In this country, there are more part-time workers and more working poor than there are people who identify as middle class. 
What is the honourable senator's opinion on that?  
In this country, we have a totally isolated segment of society which is called "the mid-Canada corridor." 
Even in terms of communications, there is very little. 
What would the honourable senator do in the area of communication for those in isolated settlements regarding private pension plans? 
There are no words in Cree or michif for "private pension plan."  
I was a member of the working poor in 1965 and 1966 when this plan was put into force. 
I did not agree with the Canada Pension Plan. 
However, I will guarantee honourable senators right now that I totally agree with deductions being made, because now at least I have a pension.  
 Senator Macdonald would want us on this side to extend very warm welcome to Senator Butts , which we do .
 we a extend would . side Senator Butts want warm very do to to Senator , this Macdonald welcome which on
 side Macdonald a we on which would to us very Senator extend welcome . to Butts , Senator do this want
 do this want Senator side to a to , would warm extend we welcome Macdonald . very which us on Senator
Hon. Senators :
 Hon . Senators :
 Hon Senators . :
 : . Hon Senators
 : Hon Senators .
 Hon . : Senators
 Senators . Hon :
 : . Hon Senators
 Senators . Hon :
 Senators . : Hon
 Senators . : Hon
 Hon . Senators :
 : Senators . Hon
 : Hon . Senators
 : . Senators Hon
 Hon : Senators .
 . : Hon Senators
The Grits will never take responsibility for their actions, as they did not when they cancelled the Somalia inquiry, and when they made false accusations against a former prime minister. 
I don't know who, but I'm not responsible."  
There was not an iota of evidence to prove that what they were saying was correct. 
They did not take any responsibility after cancelling the EH-101 contract. 
They are still talking about it in cabinet. 
Nor did they take any responsibility after their failed strategy in job creation. 
Nor did they take responsibility after almost losing the country in the Quebec referendum. 
"Trust us," they say. 
One thing we can count on is if this government says it is good for Canada, it is not good for Canadians.  
At the time of the 1966 social contract with Canadians, the Liberals were in power. 
They entered into a social contract with their citizens. 
It was they who did it. 
"We will take your money and provide you with a pension," they said. 
As soon as they got their grubby hands on the cash, it was lent to the provinces at favourable interest rates. 
They were cheating Canadians who trusted that when they got old, they would have a pension. 
Baby boomers, who have paid all their working lives since the program's inception, now have the audacity to reach 50. 
We have had the audacity to reach 50!  
Senator Cools :
Not me.  
Senator Tkachuk :
 . Senators :
 : Senators Hon
 Hon : Senators
 Hon . :
Hear, hear!  
 ! hear , Hear
 Hear , ! hear
 hear ! Hear ,
 ! , hear Hear
 ! Hear hear ,
 , hear ! Hear
 Hear ! , hear
 , hear ! Hear
 Hear , hear !
 , ! hear Hear
 ! Hear , hear
 , Hear ! hear
 hear Hear ! ,
 Hear ! , hear
 ! , Hear hear
 ! Hear hear ,
While the age of 65 was formerly not achieved by many, it is being achieved by most today. 
That should be taken into consideration as a basis for increasing the age for retirement because it will decrease the burden on the young people who today believe that they will have to pay the whole shot for us.  
Senator Oliver continued: 
Honourable senators, in these times of slowing real incomes, increasing long-term interest rates, high personal taxes, increased CPP premiums, and ridiculously high EI premiums, where does the Leader of the Government believe that Canadians, who will receive less money from public plans, will find money to put away in their RRSPs to secure their own retirements?  
On November 6, Senator Oliver asked: 
Honourable senators, in 1995, the Department of Finance conducted a study on the impact of the increase in CPP premiums between 1986 and 1995. 
During that period, employee contributions rose from 1.85 per cent to 2.25 per cent of earnings, and the combined rate rose from 3.6 to 5 per cent.  
How many Canadians must pay the price for the planned increase in premiums?  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, I regret to interrupt the honourable senator, but his allotted time has expired.  
Senator Stratton :
I would like to finish my speech, if I may.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is leave granted for Honourable Senator Stratton to continue?  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
Senator Stratton :
Thank you, senators.  
In the Financial Post or The Globe and Mail it was recently explained that, as employers will have to pay higher CPP premiums and as most employers or companies have a limited budget for wages, they will have to pass on the cost to people through the price of their product, or they will have to lay people off, or they will have to go to contract workers.  
The concern is the long-term effect this huge increase will have on full-time jobs.  
 Hear hear !
 ! hear ,
 Hear ! ,
 hear ! Hear
Senator Murray :
 Murray Senator :
 : Murray Senator
 Senator : Murray
 : Murray Senator
 Senator : Murray
 Murray Senator :
 : Murray Senator
 : Murray Senator
 : Murray Senator
 : Murray Senator
 : Murray Senator
 Murray : Senator
 : Senator Murray
 Senator Murray :
 Murray Senator :
 Murray Senator :
Honourable senators, there is constitutional law. 
Quebec wants to proceed by the rule of law. 
They are seeking to renovate their system under the rule of law and the Constitution.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
That is not my question.  
Senator Grafstein :
I assume that if they choose to proceed, they can. 
However, why should we in the Senate allow any province to proceed in a way that we consider unlawful? 
If there is an amendment to the Constitution, each senator in his or her heart and mind, after reviewing the testimony, must come to a conclusion. 
He or she can either vote for, against or abstain from the vote on the resolution.  
They want to be under the law, as does the Province of Newfoundland. 
They want to be under the Constitution. 
If they meet the standards of a constitutional change, I, for one, will support them, notwithstanding the fact that I mistrust their motivation and mistrust what they say. 
However, on matter of dealing with the rule of law, I am bound by the rule of law.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
My question has nothing to do with that answer. 
It was renewed in 1982 and given protection from the Charter. 
Quebec has finally adopted a linguistic school system that looks very promising and can be implemented without section 93 being amended, unlike Newfoundland, which needs an amendment to Term 17 to be able to implement a non-denominational system. 
The two resolutions are completely different in content and intent.  
Again, my question relates to the fact that the new linguistic school board process is well under way. 
 Senator :
 : Senator
 Murray Senator
 : Senator
Our late friend led an exemplary life in every way. 
 friend led every late exemplary . in way life Our an
 . Our led friend in way late an life every exemplary
 friend late Our life every an in led . way exemplary
 every . life an exemplary in late led Our friend way
 every exemplary friend . late in way led Our an life
 every friend late . exemplary an life Our led way in
 life every friend Our led late exemplary an way in .
 led life in an every friend . way exemplary late Our
 way friend exemplary . an late led in every life Our
 . friend an life every exemplary Our in led way late
 way an friend late . every led exemplary in life Our
 late exemplary in led way every an friend Our life .
 late . Our an life every led friend in exemplary way
 exemplary Our led an in . way life every friend late
 an . Our led late in every friend exemplary life way
 friend exemplary late way Our every . life in an led
Motion agreed to.  
International Assembly of French-Speaking Parliamentarians 
Meeting held in Luxembourg-Report of Canadian Section Tabled 
Hon. Pierre De Bané :
Honourable senators, pursuant to rule 23(6) of the Senate, I have the honour to present, in both official languages, the reports of the Canadian section of the International Assembly of French-Speaking Parliamentarians as well as the financial report of the 23rd regular session of the IAFSP and its executive committee, held in Luxembourg from July 7 to July 10, 1997.  
Foreign Affairs 
Committee Authorized to Meet During Sitting of the Senate 
Hon. John B. Stewart :
Honourable senators, with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58(1)( a ), I move: 
That the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs have power to sit at 3:15 p.m. tomorrow, Wednesday, December 10, even though the Senate may then be sitting, and that rule 95(4) be suspended in relation thereto.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is leave granted, honourable senators?  
Hon. Noël A. Kinsella (Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition) :
Honourable senators, in the past two years or so, there has been a common understanding in this chamber that Wednesdays would constitute a short day. 
This is why we have been meeting at 1:30 p.m. The general understanding is that we try to finish our business in the chamber by about 3:30 p.m. 
In the past few weeks, we have heard requests like the one raised by the Honourable Senator Stewart. 
If the request speaks to a Tuesday or a Thursday, when we normally meet at 2 p.m. and sit a little longer, there would be no difficulty, all things being equal, in granting leave. 
However, I am having some difficulty in granting leave for a day when we are supposed to be having a short day in any event.  
I would ask the honourable Chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee if he would explain his motion in light of the fact that Wednesday is a short day.  
Senator Stewart :
 late friend led an exemplary life in every way .
 Our every way led . friend an life exemplary in
 exemplary friend way late led Our every . an in
 late in life every led friend way an . exemplary
He will be remembered for his efforts and for his services to young people, to war veterans - of whom he was one - to the underprivileged, the coalminers and the people in Cape Breton. 
 He efforts , coalminers for the underprivileged his , for people to will was the - to one war in and services people Breton whom Cape of and veterans - his be young he . to the remembered
 to to for in and young Cape people for , was and whom the one the the war , of will services people efforts Breton to . He - - he his his coalminers veterans be underprivileged remembered
 whom the his the of . - in will young Cape people his to , one underprivileged he people war for for coalminers , remembered Breton and was be to He efforts to services and veterans the -
 for was he young coalminers and his to for of Breton people underprivileged to He to , be one remembered people the veterans in will - war - the the whom efforts . and his services Cape ,
 Breton war in his people - services underprivileged and Cape to , to . the coalminers his - people of was for the he veterans to He young and for whom remembered the be efforts , will one
 Breton and veterans people efforts - and . one the his be Cape for , the He - whom the coalminers to to was young in services war , people his underprivileged to remembered for will he of
 the was , whom veterans for underprivileged to be Breton remembered the the young one efforts his his , Cape people . he to services and for will to He people of in - coalminers war and -
 , the the war coalminers to and his for the . services will in Breton and He to Cape , - he to his was people for whom one - remembered underprivileged of young people be efforts veterans
 his veterans , was . Cape efforts remembered people Breton be the young and for coalminers in of to war - , - the one his to will services the He whom people and he for to underprivileged
 . one of coalminers young for to services his veterans war underprivileged Cape , - the he and be people to and the remembered , to for whom He in was the will Breton efforts - people his
 his underprivileged the the the remembered for and of young - war efforts , be in people to , Cape whom coalminers people and for He . veterans will his Breton to one to he was services -
 , people he He - Cape services war whom of in , to one and efforts be was his to the underprivileged Breton young coalminers . his for and will people the the for veterans - to remembered
 young Breton - services coalminers underprivileged to was - and his , to for remembered his whom for , to people of in he and people the efforts . be He will Cape war veterans the one the
 war to the underprivileged to people and for , . He was in whom efforts services coalminers the - for Cape be , of remembered Breton his - and one to the will veterans people young he his
 efforts veterans young Breton underprivileged be the Cape to one for people the - in to the whom . and his remembered he was his people and will - , services for to of coalminers , He war
 , , for was efforts veterans will and his Cape services underprivileged be people his in the - coalminers Breton to - people the one war He . he young of to whom for and the to remembered
Hon. Mira Spivak :
Honourable senators, late last week, the consulting firm Informetrica released a study entitled, "The Scale of the Challenge for Reducing Canadian Greenhouse Gas Emissions." 
This report states: 
We conclude that there is almost no chance of meeting this goal in Canada under any reasonable economic scenario...  
And I stress this last part: 
...given current commitments to action.  
Could the Leader of the Government tell us if the relevant ministers are aware of this study, whether there have been any responses, or what the reaction has been to this prestigious firm's study?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
It provides very important data. 
I am not sure the government would necessarily agree with the findings of the study but, certainly, those findings will be taken into consideration.  
Senator Spivak :
I am glad to hear that.  
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Concept of Differing Targets-Government Position 
Hon. Mira Spivak :
In the current discussions in Kyoto, the idea of tailoring reductions targets to individual countries' economic and social profiles rather than having a one-size-fits-all commitment has gained some currency, particularly in view of the most recent American proposal. 
Where does the Canadian delegation stand with respect to this concept?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government):
Honourable senators, the media is reporting, of course, on a possible deal on targets and time-tables which could see Canada accepting a reduction of 5 per cent from 1990 levels bythe year 2010. 
At this point, these reports are speculative, but negotiations are ongoing.  
National Unity 
 He will be remembered for his efforts and for his services to young people , to war veterans - of whom he was one - to the , the coalminers and the people in Cape Breton .
 be the he coalminers for the - whom - Cape . to to services for his , one to efforts underprivileged remembered the of and will war his , was people He veterans and Breton young in
 to underprivileged of his war the He , and the , veterans the efforts - one his he be in remembered to Cape will . whom people people Breton coalminers was young for for and to -
 underprivileged young the people He coalminers , the in people will remembered to services one and veterans to his his and whom the - . to efforts Breton Cape for , he was be for war of
He will be remembered most fondly there and in this chamber, where he was so warmly regarded and highly respected.  
 he fondly this will , remembered where in respected . chamber and there and regarded He warmly was most highly so be
 most respected remembered highly and be where fondly he will and regarded there warmly . , so this chamber in was He
 he this was where and most He will in remembered be so and , warmly regarded there fondly respected . highly chamber
 . , this chamber warmly where He he so will most in remembered respected be fondly there and was highly regarded and
 , in . He will this be regarded there so and most warmly fondly and highly where chamber was respected he remembered
 respected be regarded warmly will there fondly was so and , in remembered chamber and He . he highly where this most
 be regarded this remembered and . respected highly he there will was chamber and , He warmly so most in where fondly
 warmly remembered there where chamber and . this respected , was will fondly in so be regarded he He and highly most
 respected was regarded and highly he chamber be warmly there . remembered where will most in , He and so this fondly
 remembered , regarded He and warmly . in and he was highly fondly chamber be where this most respected so will there
 respected . warmly fondly highly he there He chamber will be so and where , remembered and in regarded this was most
 regarded he will He most chamber was , there warmly and fondly this and . highly respected so remembered where be in
 remembered most be , this where highly He will he . and so there was in respected chamber and regarded warmly fondly
 regarded there chamber was will respected He fondly most . this and warmly he in and so be , remembered highly where
 will fondly highly this was , in chamber regarded where warmly and so . be he there remembered most He respected and
 be , remembered where so fondly in and highly he respected this warmly and regarded there chamber most He will . was
And do you know of any monopoly where unacceptable mismanagement did not occur at one time or another? 
There is a long list of unfortunate cases of poor management - we have all heard stories of the extravagant expense accounts of people in the public sector who think they own the jobs they are holding - of bad investments, such as those made in real estate by an agency like the one we are creating, for example, of consumer gouging - we have seen monopolies charge excessive rates, because they were the only ones providing the service - of unreasonable benefits, such as complete job security for employees at the expense of the taxpayer - as has occurred in crown corporations you are familiar with - of differences in economic and social objectives - this also happened when an agency was created and given a mandate, and then after 15 years, it started doing something else, we have all seen this - of conflicts of interest involving officials who make no difference between their personal interest and that of the public, et cetera.  
There is a long list of horror stories involving monopolies. 
The whole history of the public sector, here and elsewhere, is full of such unfortunate incidents. 
I will not speak here about what occurred in Eastern Europe or in the Communist Bloc. 
But in this country and in countries like France and England, such cases have been a constant feature of the past 15 or 20 years.  
You may tell me that such things also happen in the private sector. 
Of course, but in this case it is everybody's money that is at stake, and not just private funds.  
That is why careful consideration must be given to this proposal for a new government structure. 
I am referring to the Investment Board.  
All the contributions will be invested by this so-called Investment Board. 
I would like to start by saying that in 10 years, we will have a government agency managing some $150 billion.  
Do you realize how much power these people will have? 
Every week, every Monday morning when these people arrive at work, they will find in front of them millions and millions of dollars that they will have to invest immediately. 
Three billion dollars is $3,000 million. 
Theoretically, this is $600 million a day. 
This has to be invested right away, it cannot wait until the afternoon.  
Do you think that the heavy machinery required for these operations will be efficient? 
Impossible, honourable senators. 
There will be lost efficiency, which means financial losses. 
 He will be remembered most there and in this chamber , where he was so warmly regarded and highly respected .
 fondly in . remembered will He respected chamber was where so and there most warmly this highly he regarded and be
 He will remembered . and so warmly where respected highly and chamber fondly was this , in regarded be he there
 was warmly he respected fondly regarded be remembered He chamber so and where and most . there highly in this ,
Hon. Joyce Fairbairn :
 Fairbairn Hon : . Joyce
 : . Joyce Hon Fairbairn
 Fairbairn Hon Joyce . :
 Hon Fairbairn Joyce . :
 Hon . : Fairbairn Joyce
 Fairbairn : Joyce Hon .
 Joyce . : Hon Fairbairn
 Hon Joyce . : Fairbairn
 : Hon Joyce . Fairbairn
 . : Hon Fairbairn Joyce
 Joyce : Fairbairn Hon .
 : Joyce Hon Fairbairn .
 Hon Fairbairn : Joyce .
 : Fairbairn Joyce . Hon
 . Hon : Fairbairn Joyce
 : . Joyce Hon Fairbairn
It is part of a payroll tax to buy universal disability insurance, and then the social engineers took over.  
I want to give senators an historical perspective. 
There have been many amendments made over the years to the CPP. 
Yet, the government has said, "We will not touch that fund." 
However, they touched the other fund. 
Since 1973, they have been making new legislation and implementing new programs. 
Why will they not use the fund that will accumulate on the other side, over which Parliament has no control? 
We saw this stuff today when we were studying the Estimates. 
The government has said that we did it, as Tories. 
However, the Liberals were in power a lot longer, so they are much more responsible.  
Retirement and earnings tests for individuals were eliminated in 1974. 
Benefits were provided to male and female contributors, to surviving spouses and dependent children. 
However, instead of taking it out of general revenue, the government took it out of the CPP because, in the old days, there was lots of money in that fund. 
There were not as many old people. 
There was a great number of working people, and lots of cash. 
They said, "We can throw it around." 
No one was thinking what would happen when people in the large demographic group turned 65.  
The amendments provided for the elimination of CPP children's benefits which previously applied - they changed it again - where more than four children of a deceased or disabled contributor had been eligible for such benefits. 
Now, if you have more than four kids, that is fine, too. 
However, it was another increased cost to what should be a pension plan. 
 Hon . Fairbairn :
 Joyce Hon . :
 Joyce Fairbairn Hon .
 Joyce Fairbairn : Hon
Honourable senators, I, too, should like to add a few words of remembrance and appreciation for my good friend Senator John M. Macdonald, who came from an area of which I am enormously fond, Cape Breton Island.  
 from I who area for should senators Senator , Honourable I M enormously appreciation Island came of of Breton too , few good words . , a , my John friend remembrance to which . add like fond and Macdonald am an , Cape
 appreciation and I . I , of Breton Senator M good am , to which from like for my . friend senators few , fond too Cape John area Macdonald should , remembrance Island , an Honourable a of enormously came who words add
 like from and , am came remembrance appreciation which Breton of I John friend area fond a add , Senator , of few Island words Cape . who for my to Honourable should M too I , . , senators Macdonald good an enormously
 for to , appreciation Island a which area Cape I , , an Macdonald friend . enormously my words I remembrance M fond few am Honourable of Breton came add , senators . John and who like should of good Senator , from too
 remembrance , fond am enormously M I an Macdonald for Cape words which friend Honourable should area few I of good from Breton appreciation senators a to too . , , who like Senator and , came add John my of , Island .
 too friend to Senator good my Honourable am , an from , of I came Breton appreciation who , words should add John M . . , for Island Cape which a and of like Macdonald area senators few enormously , I fond remembrance
 fond senators came an should , I remembrance , , to Cape and . I Breton enormously words add John like , too my appreciation Island who a from . M few Honourable good of Macdonald am area , friend for which Senator of
 to , , came . of . I , I area who an good few Breton am should fond and Macdonald friend , from appreciation Cape words M add like too Senator senators a Honourable enormously of John for Island which remembrance , my
 of , , Breton . a . I my remembrance and Macdonald Senator , too to , appreciation am Cape should words which friend an fond , area who from good came I like senators M enormously of Honourable for Island John few add
 came too Senator , from and of , an fond am which I area words to for Cape . few John enormously senators , friend appreciation , M of . a , Honourable like my I good remembrance Island Macdonald who add should Breton
 I area am Cape add Senator should senators to good an and Breton , my like Macdonald John from , enormously a of friend remembrance . , too of , came words I Island who , . appreciation M which fond for Honourable few
 senators . an words Cape I from Island , who Senator Breton , of , and to John a Macdonald remembrance appreciation which enormously fond M friend came area add like should , I good for Honourable , too few am . my of
 good , John area a from few and who I Macdonald of I Honourable am add , of , like which , my words fond , Senator Island an came should for to remembrance too Cape . M Breton enormously senators friend . appreciation
 area for an appreciation Island from , like who John few Honourable . to Cape remembrance came , M fond a Senator my , , , friend . Breton good I should enormously of senators too which I of am Macdonald and words add
 good I of of , , which add for fond , Cape area I and enormously Honourable a my remembrance Senator few John senators should to friend Island like Macdonald an . am too , who M appreciation Breton words . , came from
 John of I add an Breton , enormously Cape should Island . , good I Senator fond , words too . of who area came am which from for a like Honourable few Macdonald , to my and , M senators appreciation friend remembrance
The Constitution Act, 1867, is amended by adding, immediately after section 93, the following: 
"93A. 
Paragraphs (1) to (4) of section 93 do not apply to Quebec." 
CITATION 
2. This Amendment may be cited as the Constitution Amendment (year of proclamation) (Quebec).  
The special joint committee on which I have the honour to sit was given the mandate of studying the proposed amendment to section 93. 
Today, we have before us the resolution to amend section 93 of the Constitution Act, 1867.  
Briefly put, I support this resolution. 
I am also convinced that the majority of Catholic parents in Quebec who enjoy the guarantees provided under section 93 support this amendment, as do the majority of Protestant parents, who are in the same situation.  
However, the Quebec National Assembly will no longer be subject to legislation predating Confederation with respect to denominational instruction.  
These laws of Quebec that predate Confederation and concern Catholic and Protestant denominational schools have led to the creation of an unusual system, which gave Catholic and Protestant parents different rights, according to where they lived in the province.  
Catholic and Protestant school boards are thus to be found protected by the Constitution within the old limits of Montreal and Quebec City. 
Elsewhere in the province the Catholic school boards are not protected by the Constitution, except in predominantly Protestant districts, where Catholic parents are in the minority.  
Outside Montreal and Quebec City, the Constitution protects Protestant school boards if, in a district with a Catholic majority, the Protestant parents are in the minority.  
Honourable senators, educational reform has been a concern of Quebec governments for over 30 years. 
And one of the subjects that keeps coming back, since the publication of the Parent report in the 1960s, is the establishment of school boards on the basis of Canada's two official languages. 
The ongoing challenge was to reconcile linguistic school boards with the constitutional guarantee protecting Catholic and Protestant school boards in Montreal and Quebec City. 
Even though the Supreme Court approved the system contemplated in Bill 107, the theoretical coexistence of linguistic and denominational school boards proved impracticable.  
Obviously, it is primarily in Montreal that it appears most difficult to set up linguistic school boards without having to support an overlap and interpenetration of structures. 
Lorraine Pagé, of the Centrale de l'enseignement du Québec, testified before the committee that, in Montreal: 
 Honourable senators , I , too , should like to add a few words of remembrance and appreciation my good friend Senator John M . Macdonald , who came from an area of which I am enormously fond , Cape Breton Island .
 I an , should . to a area like friend of remembrance , from Honourable my who appreciation Macdonald and Cape , I too good , which of few . , for words Senator Breton Island M add senators John am came fond
 for , , my , from to M appreciation , which am came of add friend I enormously like , words Cape Macdonald Breton too area senators Senator few I and John . who an fond Honourable Island of good should remembrance .
 . Breton and of . for from , which am my Senator like , to came who of words enormously too I good Macdonald Island remembrance appreciation , area senators , an friend Honourable should few M add John fond I , a
As a senator in this place, John M. offered a very special brand of public service to his beloved island, to his province and to his country. 
 John place . special island public this to of As country service a brand his M and very beloved his to in to his province a , , senator . offered
 a his his very to beloved to in offered and to , brand John . M this a , of special place As public service country senator . his province island
 a M As senator service his province , , brand special public this his very beloved island a and in offered John to . to place his country . of to
 this offered to , . place M to of a . to island senator very his his public country a service his beloved special brand province and John , in As
 in beloved this As island very brand a to country his of to , his John , place special offered . . service province public to a senator M his and
 John his As special very offered , country place of island and province a public , to beloved . . M in to his service a this his brand senator to
 offered a to to , As senator very this public of . M his John island in . country brand and special service beloved his his a province place to ,
 to to island country his place and . beloved his a a offered public this special M brand , , to As John province . senator his in service of very
 , service of special senator his public to brand his to very . offered . beloved and John , this As his country to a M island a place province in
 public his . senator John a service very his island a place to offered , brand in , to province to . of M and special this beloved his As country
 public , and brand province place very a his senator country to of this to in service . . his special a to As John island offered his beloved M ,
 to offered this a public , island M . John to beloved of country senator . very service his , his to his in special and province place brand As a
 to special service and , to of a beloved his senator As John offered his place this his island , . M province brand in country a to very . public
 beloved and M senator offered his island public a , in his this brand his special very service a province place . of . country John to to , to As
 to and John As brand service country his M to in , his beloved public this of island . special a his offered to place . a , very senator province
 his John place service beloved senator country to , special a As his brand his to a , and very . island M . to in this public province offered of
He said in fact last week in Quebec City that he would be prepared to negotiate Quebec's separation, if certain conditions were met.  
I would first like to know what conditions the Prime Minister was referring to?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, the Government of Canada has always said that Quebecers would not be kept within Canada against their will. 
That being said, breaking up a country is not a step that one would take lightly. 
Senator Graham :
The will of Quebecers to leave must be clearly expressed. 
In addition, of course, any process that would lead to secession must respect the law.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
What does the law say on secession?  
Senator Graham :
The government has asked the Supreme Court of Canada to rule on the legality of unilateral secession.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
I had thought that Mr. Dion answered that question himself on the weekend when he said that a UDI would be illegal.  
Senator Nolin :
The Prime Minister has said he was prepared to negotiate. 
The Leader of the Government in the Senate has said the government is not prepared to negotiate.  
This morning, the Quebec minister of intergovernmental affairs, Mr. Brassard, said, and I quote: 
This is what we have always said.  
Bear in mind that this minister is a separatist. 
 As a senator in this place , John M . offered a very special brand of public service to his beloved island , his province and to his country .
 very island public to special of senator service to a this in country province and As brand a M his his , offered John . beloved his to , .
 very and brand country As place senator a M to service offered in his a , his this island his beloved public special . to . John province to of
 island to this to As , service offered M his province senator and very in public . his . a , to special country beloved John brand place a of
He did so with a rich background as an educator, as a war veteran, and as a voice of wisdom within his party, to which he remained loyal to the end.  
 war background as did which within , to He end voice and , wisdom educator an so to the as with a he as his remained party rich , of veteran a a . loyal
 war an , he which educator with so to the voice party . as as background did , , to He as veteran loyal a remained his and rich a end of a within wisdom
 a , , war . with wisdom end as a a an he loyal to did as He , voice the veteran which rich within educator party of background and remained to as so his
 rich which his within veteran wisdom did educator a so with loyal to party an to a as background he , . the He remained , war as and , voice end of a as
 of , , as war remained a wisdom which to veteran so a his with he background the He party voice . and , educator loyal did as rich to as end an a within
 as within a background a he with veteran remained He educator an of a rich to his the to loyal which as , party voice and . wisdom so as , war did end ,
 and as background . , to an end as remained a did party rich as , to so with veteran loyal a the he educator voice , his He which of within wisdom a war
 which rich as an so , remained he voice as educator background war as veteran party , to end He within loyal a wisdom did , his the and a a with . to of
 to as loyal a and veteran , as as with a , end which educator his of did , . a wisdom voice so rich party an He to background war remained the he within
 veteran , rich of so to the with loyal , war voice wisdom as he a as to remained and , as educator a a party an within He which background did end his .
 which did He and the his a an party within , as , veteran rich of with a to end as educator he a background loyal voice to . , remained wisdom so as war
 and voice of as . did background remained educator war as his , wisdom an , the with loyal so rich end to He party a a within which he , a as veteran to
 rich , , a end to . an He voice wisdom as with , loyal as did his war within which so veteran remained the educator to party he background a as and a of
 loyal party which the remained voice an as rich of within as a he a . He war , as background to his a so educator end did , to and with wisdom veteran ,
 and . an his , did so of a the wisdom , remained , background to war educator as as veteran rich within as with a end which loyal a voice party to He he
 a a and a He remained wisdom loyal within rich war end veteran which as as the did his an background educator to . so voice he to of , , , as party with
Senator Taylor :
It is obvious that my honourable friend does not have any notes.  
Senator Tkachuk :
I think I am getting to honourable senators opposite.  
I was told by the Honourable Senator Kirby that members opposite would only have one speaker on this issue. 
I have a feeling that we may hear from a few more senators after I and other senators point out some of the weaknesses in Bill C-2.  
Honourable senators, I would reiterate that this is not a pension program: this is a payroll tax! 
In the past, it harboured cheap loans for provinces, and it will harbour a $100-billion fund that will grow to a $1-trillion fund. 
Honourable senators, we will not need to pay the price. 
We will be long gone before the young people who starting out now, and who expect a pension plan when they grow old, will reap the benefits of what we sow today.  
Honourable senators on this side and honourable senators on the other side, I do not know why you would want to rush this bill. 
What is in it for you? 
What is in it for the Minister of Finance? 
What is in it for anyone to rush this bill through Parliament by December 19? 
No reasonable explanation has been given to me, and I am sure no reasonable explanation has been given to my honourable friends, other than the PMO, Mr. Goldenberg and Mr. Martin, telling you to pass this bill by December 19. 
They are telling you not to think about the consequences, because they are right. 
How do we know they are right? 
Why not take more time, honourable senators?  
Senator Gigantès :
Having listened to you, we know they are right.  
 He did so with a rich background as an educator , a war veteran , and as a voice of wisdom within his party , to which he remained loyal to the end .
 an end remained war his a within as a and . with as so he voice to the wisdom background a as which , He loyal veteran of educator , to did rich ,
 rich and party a as voice as , educator to , background wisdom . the war to with of loyal which a a so remained an veteran within He as , he his did
 voice . as so which war background as and did veteran an He a a party of wisdom a with , loyal rich to his to as the educator end , remained he within
I attended his funeral in North Sydney. 
 attended . his I in funeral North Sydney
 . I in North his Sydney funeral attended
 in I funeral Sydney his . attended North
 attended North . funeral his Sydney in I
 I North Sydney his attended in funeral .
 North I attended Sydney in . funeral his
 North I attended his in . Sydney funeral
 funeral in Sydney attended I . North his
 funeral Sydney in North attended his I .
 funeral Sydney in his North I . attended
 I attended funeral North . Sydney in his
 . North I in attended his funeral Sydney
 Sydney North I his attended . funeral in
 attended . in his Sydney funeral North I
 . North I Sydney funeral in his attended
 North . funeral in his attended I Sydney
Within the first six weeks, 25 per cent of the public were in the private pension plan. 
Today, 90 per cent of the public are in the private pension plan, and that plan is doing extremely well. 
Despite the crisis with the Mexican peso, which involves their next door neighbour, their equity market survived, and is, in fact, doing well. 
Investors are getting good returns.  
Two lessons are to be learned from that. 
First, a communication plan on the part of the government can sell a fund that is fundamentally sound; and, second, a private pension plan can work.  
Honourable senators, we will have a private pension plan in this country within 10 years, because those "generation X" kids will demand it from us. 
The "excess generation," as the article calls you and I, will have no say in the matter.  
My fundamental point is that there must be a communications plan.  
This bill is seen by many people across the country as nothing more than another tax grab by the Liberal government, a tax grab in the range of $100 billion. 
Imagine bringing in a bill of such magnitude without giving Canadians the opportunity to have input into such dramatic changes to their retirement system as we know it, changes which will dramatically change the three pillars of our pension system, OAS, GIS, and the Canada Pension Plan.  
As I noted in a question to the Leader of the Government in the Senate on October 30: 
My question pertains not to the proposed changes to the Canada Pension Plan but to the government's efforts to sell those changes to Canadians. 
Can the minister report on what the government has spent and what will be spent in the future for communications concerning the Canada Pension Plan, including polling, focus groups, communications, advice and strategy and advertising?  
Other than the simple response that there was a 1-800 number that people could call, I received no response. 
That is what the government determines is a sufficient communications plan for Canadians to understand what the heck is going on. 
That is a travesty. 
That, to me, is not responsible government whatsoever. 
Can you imagine a prime minister who said that he is a man of the people, a man who is determined to change the way government is done, now ramming through the most dramatic changes to our pension system without informing the Canadian public of just what the government is proposing and allowing input from them?  
Honourable senators, I refer to questions raised in this place over the last several months, questions that relate to the ever-increasing taxes that this government is imposing on the lives of all working Canadians. 
 I his funeral in North Sydney .
 Sydney his I North in funeral .
 North . attended funeral I Sydney his
 attended I funeral North his . Sydney
It was magnificent. 
 It magnificent . was
 was It . magnificent
 magnificent was It .
 . magnificent It was
 magnificent It . was
 . magnificent It was
 was magnificent It .
 magnificent It was .
 was It magnificent .
 magnificent . was It
 magnificent It was .
 magnificent was It .
 . magnificent It was
 It magnificent . was
 It . was magnificent
 magnificent . was It
Honourable senators, I commend Senator Cools for all the work and research she has done. 
Many aspects of her amendment are worthwhile considering. 
However, I feel she has omitted to take into consideration one aspect of our legislation.  
Any law passed by Parliament does not become law until it receives Royal Assent, and having the Supreme Court direct Parliament to pass a law by December 19, 1997 takes away the prerogative of the sovereign. 
That is why we have Royal Assent. 
We could have the ridiculous situation of one of the judges who ordered the enactment of this legislation by December 19 coming into this chamber and giving Royal Assent on behalf of the sovereign.  
Motion in Sub-Amendment 
Hon. Orville H. Phillips :
Therefore, I move: 
That the motion in amendment be amended by deleting the word "and" at the end of paragraph ( b ) and by adding the following after paragraph ( c ): 
( d ) the Court, by its Order of November 19, 1997 that Bill C-16 must be enacted by December 19, 1997, is impeding proceedings in Parliament and is subordinating the Senate of Canada; and 
( e ) the Court is usurping the royal prerogative of the Sovereign who, with the advice and consent of Parliament, keeps and upholds the Queen's Peace and the public peace and security of all.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, I have a problem. 
Offhand, I do not know if you can amend a reasoned amendment. 
I must look at the precedents. 
Debate adjourned to await the ruling of the Speaker. 
Quebec 
Linguistic School Boards-Amendment to Section 93 of Constitution-Report of Special Joint Committee Adopted 
On the Order: 
 was magnificent .
 magnificent It .
 It . was
 was It magnificent
Although it was a sad occasion, it was also one of tremendous warmth and pride for all of those who filled that beautiful church. 
 it occasion a sad of it of was was warmth one who all Although beautiful church also and those for pride , tremendous that filled .
 also a it all . that of was and tremendous for warmth pride beautiful filled those church one it who sad , occasion was of Although
 was of warmth church pride it also of sad . those who , all was tremendous beautiful Although that a filled and one for it occasion
 it all who of . sad one for pride church also was Although filled and tremendous warmth occasion those , was beautiful of that a it
 Although also all beautiful those it warmth . church who a one , that for was filled of of tremendous was it sad pride and occasion
 filled who . tremendous it of beautiful occasion sad that one for was a warmth also was of , and pride church all those Although it
 church all who beautiful of warmth . was for tremendous filled that and Although it of pride also it one , was occasion sad those a
 church a it of pride all occasion of it and tremendous was filled who beautiful , that for . sad warmth those also was one Although
 also Although that of sad was filled and was pride warmth it tremendous it a all occasion beautiful church of those for , who . one
 and beautiful also of that occasion those one of . , church warmth pride for all who was a filled it tremendous it sad Although was
 those tremendous pride church was of all also . who Although one it a filled that was beautiful and for occasion , of warmth it sad
 sad was who church and a that filled . was for pride also tremendous occasion one of all it beautiful those it of warmth , Although
 that tremendous it Although filled . for who , and church occasion warmth of pride beautiful those one it also sad of was was a all
 also all . of it , was sad one was beautiful that filled pride who tremendous church it for of and those warmth Although a occasion
 also who it that of beautiful occasion and those Although a for . sad church it of filled was all was pride one tremendous warmth ,
 beautiful those and of it for occasion . filled tremendous who church sad a Although was pride of it also warmth , was that all one
In that context, I am sure all of those present from the provinces are being consulted. 
The negotiations are in a state of flux at the present time and it might be premature for me to speculate on what the outcome might be.  
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Target Year for Implementation of Government Position taken at Kyoto-Government Position 
Hon. Mira Spivak :
I thank the Leader of the Government for his answer. 
I should like to point out that Manitoba is distinct from Alberta, as are all provinces.  
In their December 1 announcement, the government also revealed that not until 1999 would they be able to provide more detail as to the costs and specific actions that would be required to meet our Kyoto commitments. 
Assuming that it will take some time to implement the actions that the government will propose in 1999, it could be the year 2000, 2001, 2002 or 2003 before the government takes steps to meet its Kyoto targets. 
Some of these actions will undoubtedly entail negotiations and agreements with provincial governments, which means it could be as late as 2006 before the government can meet the targets which were set out.  
Perhaps the Leader of the Government in the Senate could tell us in which year implementation of the Kyoto decisions will begin, because, surely, that must have been taken into consideration prior to the Kyoto meeting.  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Yes, honourable senators, discussions were held, and consideration was given to when the new objectives or conclusions of the Kyoto conference might be put in place, or kick into place, if I may use that terminology.  
I do not believe a final agreement has been reached on that. 
I know that the Government of Canada will cooperate with the provinces and territories and, in partnership with industry, the environmental groups and individual Canadians, develop a practical, flexible, step-by-step plan for reducing emissions. 
Many economic analyses of potential costs attributable to taking action to reduce emissions have been done, but no conclusions have been reached respecting timing or actual costs.  
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Informetrica Study on Meeting Targets-Government Position 
Hon. Mira Spivak :
Honourable senators, late last week, the consulting firm Informetrica released a study entitled, "The Scale of the Challenge for Reducing Canadian Greenhouse Gas Emissions." 
This report states: 
We conclude that there is almost no chance of meeting this goal in Canada under any reasonable economic scenario...  
 Although it was a sad occasion , it was also one of warmth and pride for all of those who filled that beautiful church .
 beautiful , warmth pride was it filled occasion one for was church those . it of who and all of that sad Although a also
 warmth of for and filled occasion of church it a one . , was tremendous who beautiful pride was it that sad Although all those
 church that a for those who was and was sad it tremendous occasion beautiful , Although one of filled pride of also it warmth .
I should say in reflection almost of what Senator Murray said, Senator John M. welcomed me with genuine support when I came to the Senate in 1984. 
 1984 Senator I reflection in Senator to in say M welcomed Murray Senate support almost should . came with me I what genuine , of said John . when the
 said welcomed John I Senator in Murray reflection what say should me . . 1984 Senate with genuine to when support the came , M almost Senator I of in
 welcomed support with say . genuine . in me when 1984 almost the , Murray in should I came what said Senator of Senator Senate I reflection John to M
 I with support when of Murray welcomed came Senator 1984 . M genuine the say , almost Senator in John in should me said reflection to . I Senate what
 John Senator support reflection me to of in when genuine Murray I Senate what say 1984 almost . M welcomed should with came , the . said in I Senator
 the Senate genuine to when in came Murray should of . what M say 1984 with Senator me support , welcomed in I John I . Senator reflection said almost
 Murray in almost welcomed Senator genuine say Senator should M me to I . 1984 with John . when came of , in support what said reflection the I Senate
 of Senator in almost reflection what . should said me the support I John genuine when 1984 in Senator with I M say to , came . Murray Senate welcomed
 , Senate M should 1984 reflection John when . genuine Senator welcomed I in Murray the came me of said Senator with I . in to support almost what say
 , Senate me welcomed Senator came the support said should of John in Murray M to with what Senator when reflection . 1984 in . almost genuine I say I
 support me welcomed in almost to Senator say M Senator said in reflection Senate what John I came . Murray I with genuine the should of . when , 1984
 should 1984 me John Senator in came . say what M I . of welcomed Senate when with the in almost reflection to Senator support genuine Murray said I ,
 in welcomed said to 1984 what Senator the me should John . almost of I I reflection . came Senator , in support with Senate genuine when say Murray M
 Murray Senate said when John support the to , . Senator of I in in say almost welcomed M 1984 . should with what reflection me Senator genuine came I
 say in came M . should the genuine in me Senate Senator I welcomed what Murray said I with John reflection to almost Senator of 1984 , . support when
 genuine what in Murray in when support should I 1984 to Senator John . Senate Senator came I reflection , with M said . say almost me the of welcomed
That Parliament should or would exercise such power was obviously a much more difficult question. 
We recognize, under our Constitution, the nature of the exclusivity of this aspect of education under the Constitution as a provincial matter. 
This question, in pith and substance, is a matter of provincial education within the powers of the Province of Quebec. 
Then, honourable senators, came the more complicated problem alluded to by Senators Wood, Pitfield, Bolduc, Lavoie-Roux and Kirby and Lynch-Staunton, namely, how to determine whether or not, as defenders of the Constitution, we in the Senate could satisfy ourselves that there was a majority of the so-called "minorities" affected by any proposed diminution of their rights or privileges. 
All senators agree that one of our paramount duties in the Senate is to safeguard the Constitution and the rights of the minorities under that Constitution.  
I shall now turn to the essence of section 93, which is called by some commentators, a "Pocket Bill of Rights." 
That is a misnomer.  
In essence, section 93 is a series of privileges rather than full rights. 
Clearly, this is not the case here. 
Section 93 has yet another substantial problem which further diminished and minimized one's ability to define the subsections as containing full rights. 
On its face, these privileges, or limited rights, pertain only to the geography of the city of Montreal and Quebec City at the date of Confederation and beyond, into the province, to the privileges or rights of dissentient Roman Catholic and Protestant denominational school boards.  
Therefore, it is so difficult for me to understand how the subsections of 93 can be considered full rights. 
They could be considered privileges for geographically defined and certain narrowly cast denominational groups.  
Notwithstanding this difficulty, I still considered we had a responsibility to examine whether these groups, said to be affected by these privileges or narrow rights or attenuated rights, agreed with their substitution - not their diminishment or removal - for the architecture of denominational access now afforded under the provisions of Quebec educational laws. 
I say "substitution" because, while the constitutional provisions were being attenuated, denominational rights had previously been incorporated in the Quebec Education Bill 109 and its predecessors leading to that bill. 
There is a clear, overwhelming consensus for citizens in the province of Quebec to maintain a form, some form, of denominational teaching within their school system architecture.  
It is equally clear that there was an overwhelming consensus with few dissents throughout every segment of Quebec for renovating the Quebec school system into two linguistic streams, two linguistic boards, English and French. 
There is no question whatsoever in my mind, based on the evidence that I heard.  
Now we come to the more difficult question confronting members of the committee - to determine if there was a "majority" of the so-called "minorities" affected or given these denominational privileges.  
Even here, we had difficulty in definition. 
 I should say in reflection almost of what Senator Murray said , Senator John M welcomed me with genuine support when I came to the Senate in 1984 .
 me almost Murray . when , welcomed 1984 Senator M in with what in I should genuine came John I Senate the . say said to of reflection Senator
 say almost when in . Murray , John the . M genuine in reflection Senator came support of said Senate 1984 welcomed should to Senator I I with what
 to in of almost , John in me should I I M when what said say support . genuine Senator 1984 welcomed Senate with Murray reflection Senator . came
The feeling was mutual to the end. 
 feeling the was to . end mutual The
 feeling The to was end mutual the .
 mutual to was feeling the The . end
 was end . to The the feeling mutual
 the The mutual feeling was end to .
 The the was mutual to feeling end .
 mutual the to The . was end feeling
 The the mutual . was to feeling end
 end mutual to the . feeling was The
 The end . was to mutual feeling the
 mutual to The feeling was . end the
 to The the was end mutual feeling .
 mutual to The end the was feeling .
 The the to mutual feeling . was end
 feeling was end the mutual . to The
 mutual end feeling was to The . the
From the beginning, the CPP was simple, but it was misnamed. 
It was misnamed because it is also a life insurance program. 
However, it is a silly program when it is part of a pension plan.  
Instead of cancelling the benefit, there is an argument made as to whether it should be means tested when cancelled or not. 
That is an area where we can save a lot of money because, as people are dying today, cheques are going out in the mail, at $3,500 a shot. 
Yet we do not have enough money to pay proper pensions when people are alive.  
It is also a disability program. 
There is nothing wrong with having a disability program, but it is part of the Canada Pension Plan now. 
It is part of a payroll tax to buy universal disability insurance, and then the social engineers took over.  
I want to give senators an historical perspective. 
There have been many amendments made over the years to the CPP. 
Yet, the government has said, "We will not touch that fund." 
However, they touched the other fund. 
Since 1973, they have been making new legislation and implementing new programs. 
Why will they not use the fund that will accumulate on the other side, over which Parliament has no control? 
We saw this stuff today when we were studying the Estimates. 
The government has said that we did it, as Tories. 
However, the Liberals were in power a lot longer, so they are much more responsible.  
Retirement and earnings tests for individuals were eliminated in 1974. 
Benefits were provided to male and female contributors, to surviving spouses and dependent children. 
 The feeling was mutual to the end
 end the was to mutual . feeling
 the was . The mutual end feeling
 to end feeling The was . mutual
I can corroborate Senator Lynch-Staunton's anecdote, not too long ago, about John M.'s exquisite sense of propriety in wishing to travel with two nurses and not one. 
 anecdote of too travel about Senator long , sense .' nurses , two ' and exquisite with not one Staunton s propriety wishing corroborate not s to I John in ago Lynch . - M can
 not about of long can two anecdote M propriety exquisite in corroborate ago , .' one , not wishing to s . Lynch ' sense I s nurses - Senator Staunton with John too travel and
 not sense one , I , can of Lynch two exquisite too about anecdote wishing Senator ' nurses Staunton not with propriety M s ago s travel to in - long John . corroborate and .'
 sense not and with , M Senator . ' in two too s I Lynch - about of .' wishing exquisite one Staunton propriety John long travel nurses not to , corroborate s ago anecdote can
 travel long about with .' , Lynch in propriety can s ' not , - corroborate M anecdote not . two John one Staunton exquisite ago nurses to too sense I s and Senator wishing of
 nurses I and not s . one .' of propriety - sense John in travel anecdote Staunton , corroborate Lynch s Senator M two to wishing with too long not , ' can exquisite about ago
 anecdote exquisite corroborate about - John , can M long ' propriety not and Staunton of nurses I s ago s too to , wishing two Senator travel sense one with not . .' in Lynch
 John s exquisite long Staunton two sense M nurses I propriety .' about - of and to s in Senator not with anecdote Lynch one ' ago not . too , corroborate can , wishing travel
 s with in not . too travel , long ago John two to nurses not and .' M ' anecdote I - Lynch of can Staunton sense s propriety one exquisite about wishing , corroborate Senator
 Staunton anecdote exquisite s ago corroborate in wishing not and I - travel too M not , , propriety . to Senator long can of sense ' nurses one two with .' about John s Lynch
 John Senator too s M not . propriety s can Lynch in about to not travel nurses sense corroborate one , Staunton two - with I long , .' ago exquisite and anecdote of wishing '
 s , with John .' I about too can corroborate sense to of long not . Staunton anecdote one ago nurses propriety , M wishing two Lynch not - Senator travel ' s in and exquisite
 - two exquisite . too can I one and Staunton Senator nurses travel corroborate with in about .' ' ago Lynch long anecdote of M John , not not to sense propriety s wishing , s
 John , ' wishing ago sense s - I can to M , long Senator in Staunton . travel one propriety two Lynch too and of with anecdote about not .' not exquisite nurses corroborate s
 one long travel anecdote of about propriety Lynch in too John two - , M Staunton ' and corroborate .' not s nurses not . , exquisite wishing with ago I sense to s can Senator
 Senator not ' long , in .' of and anecdote . about John s corroborate to - travel I too two not exquisite propriety with sense can M nurses wishing Lynch one ago , s Staunton
Activities planned around December 10, 1997 for the launch of the 50th Anniversary commemorative year of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) 
National Defence 
Lack of Helicopter for Number of Navy Frigates-Government Position 
Forestry 
Demolition of Government Laboratories-Possibility of Restoration of Funding-Government Position 
Answers to Order Paper Questions Tabled 
Energy-Department of the Environment-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Energy-Department of Justice-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Energy-Department of Multiculturalism-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Energy-Department of Natural Resources-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Defence-Status of Clothe the Soldier Project 
Defence-Status of the Armoured Personnel Carrier Replacement Program 
Business of the Senate 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
Second Reading-Debate Continued 
Canada Cooperatives Bill 
First Reading 
Criminal Code 
Interpretation Act 
Bill to Amend-Second Reading-Motions in Amendment-Debate Adjourned to Await Ruling of Speaker 
 I can corroborate Senator - Staunton ' s anecdote , not too long ago , about John M .' s exquisite sense of propriety in wishing to travel with two nurses and not one .
 wishing ago M s sense about s John , - propriety not . , exquisite long Lynch ' I two not anecdote and in Staunton travel with too can corroborate nurses .' Senator one to
 nurses to two corroborate can with ' I - s of and about . ago s travel anecdote propriety Senator Staunton sense not long John M not exquisite in too wishing one , .' ,
 John and I M , about of wishing exquisite ago anecdote Senator s propriety two too s - , corroborate one long not in . can Lynch Staunton sense with not ' to nurses .'
He confided this as well to me with a very definite twinkle in his eye.  
 as twinkle eye definite a his confided very . me in well with He to this
 a eye confided to in . twinkle definite very me with this as his well He
 He eye . his with this very definite me as to a in well confided twinkle
 to this a definite as confided He eye twinkle his me very with in . well
 a very eye well definite He to with confided me . his this as twinkle in
 to very well as He this confided a . definite eye twinkle me with his in
 definite well eye very to . He as confided a with twinkle in this me his
 this He me as twinkle . well his very a in confided definite with to eye
 twinkle confided to . a He in eye definite this his with very me as well
 this confided a He eye very in definite his twinkle with . me well to as
 eye as his well confided He me in very a . with to definite twinkle this
 me eye a well to in He . his this very as confided twinkle with definite
 this He with in a eye as twinkle to . definite me confided his very well
 me his . to definite well with eye twinkle in very as this confided a He
 very a confided eye well He his to this in with as definite me twinkle .
 to as his eye in with me He a twinkle confided well this definite . very
We had a unanimous resolution in the National Assembly of Quebec, both parties, with two abstentions. 
The efforts made by the Quebec ministers seem to assure that a strong consensus had been obtained.  
We heard direct evidence from 68 groups composed of over 100 individual witnesses. 
Notwithstanding the short time-frames allotted in our terms of reference and as referenced by Senator Lynch-Staunton, the committee clearly heard every viewpoint that people wished to express.  
I hear Senator Wood. 
I will deal with her concerns in a moment.  
While some individual groups did not give evidence, as pointed out by Senator Wood, I concluded that, having examined the materials from those groups, that their viewpoint was indeed expressed by others during the course of those hearings. 
I believe no viewpoint was excluded from our deliberations.  
The time frames in the hearings in no way diminished the committee's ability to obtain or weigh the evidence. 
The committee made a thorough investigation of that evidence. 
No point of view went unexamined, save for one raised by the Reform Party at the last minute, and I will deal with that later.  
Let me for a moment repeat what we heard. 
There was a unanimous resolution, save for two abstentions, from the Quebec assembly. 
We heard from the opposition in the assembly; the Quebec government itself; English and French school boards; Catholic, Protestant and other teachers' groups; archbishops of the Roman Catholic church and the Anglican archbishop of Quebec, which I will deal with later; minority groups including Jewish, Arab, non-Roman Catholic and other allophone groups; students groups, both English and French. 
All agreed that linguistic school boards, which were a direct consequence of this amendment, were desirable and progressive.  
There was some dissent. 
I will briefly touch on it, as did Senator Bolduc in his most insightful speech, especially with respect to the plight of certain French-speaking Protestants and certain English-speaking Catholics. 
There is no question at all that some in those groups feel detrimentally affected.  
Again, under the current Quebec law 109, the notwithstanding clauses had been included, both with respect to the Quebec Charter and the federal Charter of Rights and Freedoms, therefore allowing for denominational teaching to be continued in Quebec. 
How the Quebec government will ultimately continue to afford opportunities for denominational teaching is a much more difficult question to predict. 
 He confided this as to me with a very definite twinkle in his eye .
 very me as confided He this twinkle his a . with well to eye in
 to twinkle He . definite eye his very well a with confided as this in
 He to definite eye me this a well as his in very twinkle confided .
Hon. John Buchanan :
 John . : Hon Buchanan
 : Buchanan Hon John .
 Hon : John Buchanan .
 Buchanan . Hon John :
 : John . Buchanan Hon
 John Buchanan . : Hon
 . Hon Buchanan John :
 : Buchanan Hon John .
 John Hon . Buchanan :
 Hon John Buchanan : .
 John Buchanan : Hon .
 : John Hon Buchanan .
 Hon . : John Buchanan
 Hon : Buchanan . John
 . Hon Buchanan : John
 : . Buchanan Hon John
There is likely to be arbitrariness and patronage.  
In addition, the Board will be everywhere and inevitably set conditions. 
Businesses will have to toe the line as the provinces do when Ottawa doles out conditional funding, as you may recall. 
This concentration of power, this centralization will be unhealthy. 
This technocracy and its perverse effects make me nervous. 
I hope one day we will have nothing worse than Mr. Sorros' manoeuvres to criticize.  
The regulations governing investments and the behaviour of administrators have not been revealed. 
They are not ready. 
What guidelines will there be for administrators? 
A parliamentary review is therefore vital before their implementation.  
In concluding, I would say to the government that the preferable alternative to its bill would be to simply oblige everyone in the labour force in Canada to invest a percentage of their savings in funds under private management or let government assume its role by providing a safety net for those who could not set aside enough money for their old age.  
Here is an intelligent response to the challenge before us. 
However, and it is regrettable in this era of the welfare state, it seems to me that we prefer to make sweeping rules that apply to everyone in order to resolve the problem of a few.  
Hon. Philippe Deane Gigantès :
You talk with admiration of private investment management. 
How do you explain the disaster at Olympia & York, for example, under the management of Mr. Eyton, our colleague, and the fact that major players like Conrad Black closed Dominion Stores and took the money Dominion Stores employees had invested in a pension fund, a fund they never drew from? 
Are you telling us that the private sector will be more generous and wise than the Caisse de dépôt in Quebec? 
Senator Bolduc :
I did not say disasters did not happen in the private sector. 
Senator Gigantès :
 Hon John Buchanan :
 Hon : Buchanan .
 John : Hon Buchanan
 . : Buchanan Hon
Honourable senators, I concur with everything that has been said thus far about our dear late friend John M. I concur with everything Senator Graham said about his Cape Breton background. 
 about background everything Breton that , dear John his concur been far said Graham . with our said senators concur Honourable . I about has Senator with Cape M everything late I thus friend
 been . , everything thus John friend Cape far Graham said has that background everything about dear said late our I Honourable about with concur concur Breton Senator . his senators M I with
 with everything about . Graham , John said said has senators M with been Honourable Senator that Breton dear thus about I Cape . concur I concur late friend background our everything his far
 his Senator about M with John I dear that . said our I late about said has background , . Graham been friend everything everything concur far thus with senators Cape Breton concur Honourable
 with concur background his far dear . has friend Senator concur I been I Cape late everything said about that Graham M Breton said thus Honourable our everything about , . senators John with
 , his late concur . about with said thus Cape senators . about I concur said has John that been M Graham everything far friend with background Honourable Senator everything dear I Breton our
 about said . his concur M has concur Honourable Cape our thus friend John late Breton senators with everything . dear Graham background far been said that Senator I , with about I everything
 everything concur that about been Breton everything with , M Cape . said our far about has Senator I Graham I said thus background concur his John senators friend . with Honourable dear late
 dear Graham everything I concur about background far that . has late Breton with concur his been . Honourable friend our I said everything Senator with said about thus senators John Cape , M
 friend been background our senators concur Senator everything concur Honourable late about everything . about has Cape I Graham said I John dear Breton . with far M that , with thus said his
 background . friend far . Cape with about has said concur I our dear everything John about Graham Senator M everything Honourable senators his that been , I with late said concur thus Breton
 concur everything . far thus John Honourable has said everything Cape dear Graham about Senator senators I Breton been . friend about , said that concur our with I late background M his with
 senators everything with with his Honourable thus , Cape M background that has concur Senator I dear Breton about everything our Graham John been . said I late . said far about concur friend
 everything everything Cape , . about about Graham his senators with that been late thus Breton with Honourable concur far our M John Senator concur said . friend background I said has I dear
 friend . about background Breton . late far has , said I with his thus I about that dear Cape M Graham our everything Honourable concur with John Senator senators concur everything been said
 far Cape about his . I with about Breton concur late thus Senator that background friend has said dear concur Graham everything M senators John . been said , with our I everything Honourable
That is, in fact, what has been done since 1996 under the present system. 
It must be ensured that a conflict of interest of this kind is not permitted at all. 
I will return to this shortly.  
My fourth point concerns investment policy. 
The law should provide that the administrators of the fund are responsible for ensuring contributors a reasonable pension, while providing them with the best return, that is, the safest and best return possible.  
Canada's economy represents about 2.5 per cent of the world economy. 
So it would be wise to permit the fund not only to diversify its investments in stocks and bonds but also to invest worldwide. 
Diversification of values, in a variety of instruments, in various sectors, in different countries and currencies is thus a measure of wisdom and judgement to be left to those in charge, who must, of course, be accountable for their actions.  
Honourable senators, it would be tempting for the administrators to act as investors on occasion by investing in all sorts of businesses with their judgement either arbitrary or verging on patronage. 
We have seen this in Quebec. 
There must be strict rules to prevent this sort of thing, if we want to avoid regrettable misuse.  
The matter of the pension plan's objectives is basic. 
In this respect, the legislation must be clear. 
The board must first and foremost look after the interests of the contributors whose income security depends on its performance to a large extent.  
The history of the Quebec Caisse de dépôt et placement warrants examination in this regard. 
In the mid-1960s, at the time it was set up, Mr. Lesage, the Premier of Quebec at the time, described it as an instrument of social security. 
He added, at the instigation of some, that it would also be an instrument of economic development, with the result that, little by little, the managers who were not sufficiently dynamic in the eyes of the directors were replaced. 
It was not Mr. Caouette's money, it was real bucks. 
The second director was also an experienced investment fund manager, but the government changed in Quebec, and we ended up with people who were more dynamic and who wanted to direct the economy. 
That is when it was decided that the people running the Caisse were not dynamic enough and had to be replaced. 
 Honourable , I concur with everything that has been said thus far about our dear late friend John M . I concur with everything Senator Graham said about his Cape Breton background .
 . dear Honourable Senator with everything M his late about I concur been Cape , our everything Graham senators with about has John background said said I thus friend concur . that far
 thus M Cape late , Graham about his been said far has concur everything I . said Breton senators Honourable concur our with everything I John . that background friend Senator with about
 Senator I about his about Honourable everything our far . been has Graham John dear with senators I concur late said everything friend Breton M that background said with , Cape . concur
As a Cape Bretoner myself, I know that he was the number one Cape Bretoner. 
 the number I , a he know Cape As . one myself was Bretoner Cape Bretoner that
 was Cape the number Bretoner myself that he Cape As Bretoner I a , one know .
 the number . Bretoner was Cape Bretoner I myself he Cape As that , one know a
 As know the one myself Cape was I Bretoner , number a he Bretoner . Cape that
 Cape the Cape Bretoner was that number Bretoner myself As I . , he know a one
 he number that As I Cape the Bretoner one was Bretoner Cape . a know myself ,
 I Bretoner know one number Cape he As myself , that the Bretoner . Cape a was
 that , he a Cape Bretoner myself Bretoner I know the number . was one As Cape
 number Cape one Bretoner myself was , that Cape . he As a I Bretoner the know
 was that number one myself Cape I . Bretoner the Cape , he a Bretoner As know
 Cape Bretoner , Bretoner he As Cape number know one myself . I was a that the
 a . Bretoner one Cape , number I know was As myself Bretoner that Cape he the
 know Cape number was he , one that the Bretoner . a As myself Bretoner I Cape
 that one a Bretoner . myself he the I Cape know Cape Bretoner was , number As
 Bretoner he know As Cape I one Cape Bretoner was , that number a the myself .
 number As Bretoner . myself he a that know , Cape one the Cape I Bretoner was
With that level of cooperation, perhaps at some time in the future we can invoke a more formal process whereby there will be some guarantee to committee chairs.  
Barring that formal process, Senator Stewart has witnesses to hear from tomorrow, and I should like him to have permission to hear those witnesses tomorrow.  
Hon. John Lynch-Staunton (Leader of the Opposition) :
That worked for a while. 
Now we have forgotten Mondays, but we have continued on with the practice of having early sittings on Wednesdays. 
As a result, Wednesday has become a normal working session, going on until five or six o'clock. 
The whole purpose of starting the session at 1:30 p.m. has been defeated.  
I do not think it is correct, unless there is an urgency, for committees to sit at the same time as the chamber. 
This is not for appearances' sake, but because the work done here can often be as important in the debates as what goes on in committees. 
At various stages of our work - the introduction of bills, second reading, committee referral, then third reading - we are often doing several at the same time. 
Sometimes even two, three or four committees are sitting when we are sitting. 
That is an improper practice.  
If the deputy leader could guarantee to us that, on Wednesdays from now on - and we will strive to be cooperative - we will sit no later than 3:30 p.m., unless there is a proven urgency, then I think Senator Stewart's motion is in order. 
However, we need that assurance first.  
Senator Carstairs :
Let me assure the Leader and Deputy Leader of the Opposition that we will do everything on our part to ensure that sessions end on time. 
We did sit yesterday, which was a Monday. 
I can assure senators we will be sitting next Monday in order to fulfil the business of the chamber before the Christmas break.  
Senator Kinsella :
On that basis, I do not think leave is necessary.  
 As a Cape Bretoner myself , I that he was the number one Cape Bretoner .
 Bretoner that Bretoner was As one myself Cape I , a the . Cape number he
 Bretoner was know that a As number Cape one he . the Bretoner I Cape myself
 the Cape Bretoner myself Bretoner he number Cape As know was I a , one .
He was a champion of Cape Breton, a champion of Cape Bretoners, and a champion of fishermen, farmers, the underprivileged, the poor, steelworkers and miners. 
 Bretoners farmers . , the of , a underprivileged champion fishermen a was He champion , Cape Breton of poor , , Cape steelworkers , a the and and champion miners of
 Breton , He champion and and , a , . poor the of a Cape champion , of of the Bretoners , fishermen underprivileged a miners steelworkers farmers , was champion Cape
 underprivileged and Breton a poor champion of a farmers champion He champion steelworkers the Bretoners , miners , of Cape was fishermen , . , and the , , of a Cape
 , of farmers , and steelworkers He , . the fishermen Breton , of of , a a underprivileged Cape was champion , Cape Bretoners champion miners a champion and the poor
 a underprivileged Bretoners and the a was farmers He Breton of fishermen of steelworkers poor champion of and , miners , . Cape champion a , , the Cape , champion ,
 Bretoners He and of , , Breton , fishermen a of Cape of . poor champion champion a and farmers miners was , underprivileged steelworkers Cape the champion the , , a
 a Bretoners fishermen , poor , the champion Cape of , He miners , the of steelworkers farmers of . Breton champion a , a , was Cape underprivileged champion and and
 and underprivileged , champion champion Cape a , Breton of fishermen , poor the miners . , Bretoners He was a steelworkers champion of , Cape of and farmers , the a
 , He Cape the , of a farmers , poor the a miners . was fishermen and a Cape Bretoners champion , of underprivileged champion steelworkers and Breton of champion , ,
 , , of Bretoners champion , , Breton poor the champion fishermen steelworkers a underprivileged . farmers Cape He miners , and a a and was the champion Cape of of ,
 a champion poor steelworkers , was , the underprivileged , a Cape of and , Cape , champion the Bretoners , miners fishermen champion a and farmers of Breton . He of
 and a a . was , Cape miners Bretoners Breton champion the underprivileged champion , of Cape , the , , and steelworkers poor champion of farmers of , a He fishermen
 the , the Cape farmers miners was and a , . steelworkers , champion champion Bretoners He underprivileged , of a , of of a Cape champion poor and , Breton fishermen
 , and a Cape Breton miners and poor Bretoners a was champion Cape farmers , , the of of , underprivileged of the , . a champion champion fishermen He steelworkers ,
 , a , miners steelworkers , He poor Breton . , the champion Cape , Cape fishermen of the underprivileged Bretoners was champion and champion a of and , of a farmers
 and Cape was the a champion He , steelworkers , Cape , the , Bretoners a champion , fishermen Breton of poor underprivileged of and a champion miners of . farmers ,
Honourable senators, late last week, the consulting firm Informetrica released a study entitled, "The Scale of the Challenge for Reducing Canadian Greenhouse Gas Emissions." 
This report states: 
We conclude that there is almost no chance of meeting this goal in Canada under any reasonable economic scenario...  
And I stress this last part: 
...given current commitments to action.  
Could the Leader of the Government tell us if the relevant ministers are aware of this study, whether there have been any responses, or what the reaction has been to this prestigious firm's study?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
It provides very important data. 
I am not sure the government would necessarily agree with the findings of the study but, certainly, those findings will be taken into consideration.  
Senator Spivak :
I am glad to hear that.  
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Concept of Differing Targets-Government Position 
Hon. Mira Spivak :
In the current discussions in Kyoto, the idea of tailoring reductions targets to individual countries' economic and social profiles rather than having a one-size-fits-all commitment has gained some currency, particularly in view of the most recent American proposal. 
Where does the Canadian delegation stand with respect to this concept?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government):
Honourable senators, the media is reporting, of course, on a possible deal on targets and time-tables which could see Canada accepting a reduction of 5 per cent from 1990 levels bythe year 2010. 
At this point, these reports are speculative, but negotiations are ongoing.  
National Unity 
Recent Remarks of Prime Minister-Possible Conditions of Secession of Quebec-Government Position 
 He was a champion of Cape Breton , a champion of Cape Bretoners , and a champion of fishermen , , the underprivileged , the poor , steelworkers and miners .
 champion , He steelworkers and Breton . champion a the miners fishermen a , poor , , a champion the farmers underprivileged was Bretoners Cape and , of of , Cape
 , the steelworkers underprivileged miners He Bretoners champion poor champion , , a a of Breton , champion the and a Cape , farmers of was fishermen and Cape of .
 and , underprivileged a Breton , champion . of was champion Cape miners He Cape farmers , , and a the of champion the a Bretoners steelworkers , , poor fishermen
There was not a cause in Cape Breton in which John M. was not very much involved over his long and distinguished career. 
 much very Breton was over There in in his cause and not involved which not Cape . was . career distinguished a John long M
 M . distinguished long over not career a was cause very in John involved his Breton There much in and which not . was Cape
 cause involved career distinguished over There was very John not M in not much long his in . Breton Cape . and which a was
 which was much . There Cape cause not was in M . career John his long and not very a in involved Breton over distinguished
 Breton and involved . much career a which his Cape M long over John cause . not was distinguished in in There was very not
 Cape cause involved . in in distinguished and was not which his Breton very a career There was . much John not over long M
 which cause very over . . a was distinguished involved was career in not not John M his and Cape much long Breton There in
 in was . and over cause Cape not career . John was There M which distinguished a Breton very much long not his in involved
 in not a involved which in cause over very M his Breton distinguished not and career much There . John long was Cape . was
 Cape . was much over very a not his distinguished in in career . involved which Breton was John not long M and There cause
 Breton much distinguished involved cause career M . very in John in not Cape was which and There . a his long was over not
 in long not and was Cape There very which John a much distinguished M . his involved Breton . not was in career cause over
 . involved which John in distinguished very much over Breton career not his . in M Cape and was not was There a cause long
 Breton career not and in which very Cape . M was distinguished much involved a was long . in over cause not his There John
 M long was cause . was over and . not involved Breton much in very distinguished in a career his John not There Cape which
 a involved M his long very was which career in in distinguished There and Cape not not cause was . Breton over John much .
This technocracy and its perverse effects make me nervous. 
I hope one day we will have nothing worse than Mr. Sorros' manoeuvres to criticize.  
The regulations governing investments and the behaviour of administrators have not been revealed. 
They are not ready. 
What guidelines will there be for administrators? 
A parliamentary review is therefore vital before their implementation.  
In concluding, I would say to the government that the preferable alternative to its bill would be to simply oblige everyone in the labour force in Canada to invest a percentage of their savings in funds under private management or let government assume its role by providing a safety net for those who could not set aside enough money for their old age.  
Here is an intelligent response to the challenge before us. 
However, and it is regrettable in this era of the welfare state, it seems to me that we prefer to make sweeping rules that apply to everyone in order to resolve the problem of a few.  
Hon. Philippe Deane Gigantès :
You talk with admiration of private investment management. 
How do you explain the disaster at Olympia & York, for example, under the management of Mr. Eyton, our colleague, and the fact that major players like Conrad Black closed Dominion Stores and took the money Dominion Stores employees had invested in a pension fund, a fund they never drew from? 
Are you telling us that the private sector will be more generous and wise than the Caisse de dépôt in Quebec? 
Senator Bolduc :
I did not say disasters did not happen in the private sector. 
Senator Gigantès :
It is not a big deal if you have $3 million, but it is if you lose $35,000 or $70,000 and this is all the money you have. 
It may not be a big deal for you, but it is for small investors.  
Senator Bolduc :
Honourable senators, I never said there would not be any damage in the private sector. 
 There was not a cause in Cape Breton in which John M . was not very much involved over long and distinguished career .
 was . . cause was very much not over which in There involved Breton distinguished a in his and long Cape M not career
 over much and There involved his Cape Breton M career in . which distinguished very not . John long cause was not in a
 his . which Cape career . not and Breton involved M a There was much John not long in in distinguished over cause very
He was my friend for over 40 years. 
 He my 40 years for . was friend over
 my was friend for . years He 40 over
 over was friend . years 40 my He for
 friend years was . 40 for over my He
 was years my for . friend over 40 He
 over years for . friend my was 40 He
 . over 40 years friend was my for He
 . years was friend my He for 40 over
 was years for 40 over . friend He my
 He years 40 was over friend my for .
 40 . years He was over for my friend
 was friend . over for He 40 my years
 friend was for years over He 40 my .
 years my over . was for friend 40 He
 40 . my years over He for friend was
 He 40 my years . for friend was over
He used the surplus in the EI fund, not to extend benefits, not to reduce premiums - which is normally what is done in a payroll deduction - but to cut benefits for a totally separate policy objective. 
He used this payroll tax purely and simply, to achieve his policy goal of cutting the deficit.  
That is why the Auditor General is prohibited from examining the fund unless the directors of the fund agree. 
It should not be for the directors to agree or disagree. 
Parliament must insist that the Auditor General report to us on the fund and on its administration. 
However, the Auditor General will report to the directors of the fund on how they manage their affairs. 
That is not acceptable.  
We are talking of $100 billion by the year 2006, and rapid increases thereafter. 
On this record, it will fail.  
It is an anomaly of governments to charge taxes for employment insurance premiums, and then reduce services to accumulate a surplus to pay down a deficit. 
It then writes cheques for something else. 
The government charges taxes for transportation then imposes user fees at airports and tolls on highways for the right to use the airports and highways that we have paid taxes to build and maintain. 
It imposes taxes to create historical sites and national parks and then charge people to get in. 
It charges premiums for pensions but, by the way, cannot pay those pensions, so the government has to charge us more.  
Look through the bill. 
It is simply paying more money for less benefits. 
Anyone can do that. 
Even the Liberals can do that.  
The government is unable to manage the present program so it wants more money to enable it to manage it better. 
We must remember that the author of Bill C-2 is Paul Martin. 
 He was my friend for 40 years .
 for friend over my 40 He years .
 over 40 years . friend He for was
 years 40 friend for . was my over
He campaigned for me in every election that I ran in in Nova Scotia. 
 every I election that in Nova ran campaigned . in me Scotia for in He
 Nova that every ran I campaigned in in He me election . Scotia in for
 I every Nova in He Scotia election in me in . ran that campaigned for
 Nova in ran me in that election Scotia in for every I . He campaigned
 election I He in me Scotia ran . Nova every in in for that campaigned
 in I election in that in . Nova me ran every for He campaigned Scotia
 for every in in campaigned I that He Scotia election . in Nova me ran
 . I Scotia election in every me Nova ran He in that campaigned for in
 . Nova campaigned He in every ran in election I in for me Scotia that
 in that ran for He Nova in Scotia in me I every campaigned election .
 campaigned Scotia Nova I He every for in me in that election ran in .
 in me Scotia . election for campaigned in every He in ran I that Nova
 in Nova I in that me in He . ran election Scotia for campaigned every
 election for He that campaigned Scotia in I in in ran . Nova me every
 campaigned in every I for election in Scotia ran me He in that . Nova
 Scotia ran that He Nova in campaigned in election I . in for me every
I am not saying that this is how it should be across Canada; that is not my point. 
What I am saying is that, in Quebec, at the time, Jean Lesage had made it very clear that the fund was designed to provide social security. 
That is why we fought so hard for the Caisse de dépôt et placement at the time: to have this flexibility.  
I am not saying this practice should be generalized and extended to Ontario or any other province; it may cause problems I had not thought of so far. 
There is no doubt that it could be more difficult for some provinces. 
I do not exclude however the idea that provincial politicians could bring pressure to bear on this organization so that, when investments are made, people from each region benefit. 
To what extent will ethics and conflict of interest rules be overlooked? 
My experience tells me and I can tell you that it is going to be complicated.  
Hon. Terry Stratton :
Honourable senators, I should like participate in the debate on Bill C-2, the Canada Pension Plan.  
They were informed; and they could understand the information they were being given.  
At the end of every television interview, the finance minister reiterated that, if they did not like the private sector pension plan, they could stick with the public sector pension plan. 
He did this all the way through, for months, until it came time for the people to decide which plan they wanted.  
Within the first six weeks, 25 per cent of the public were in the private pension plan. 
Today, 90 per cent of the public are in the private pension plan, and that plan is doing extremely well. 
Despite the crisis with the Mexican peso, which involves their next door neighbour, their equity market survived, and is, in fact, doing well. 
Investors are getting good returns.  
Two lessons are to be learned from that. 
First, a communication plan on the part of the government can sell a fund that is fundamentally sound; and, second, a private pension plan can work.  
Honourable senators, we will have a private pension plan in this country within 10 years, because those "generation X" kids will demand it from us. 
 He campaigned for me in every that I ran in in Nova Scotia .
 election . campaigned Nova in I that every in Scotia in He me for
 every that campaigned He in election I in Scotia . Nova for ran me
 Nova campaigned for Scotia . in every He election I in me ran in
Those of you who knew him back in the 1950s and 1960s, through the 1970s and into the 1980s, would agree with me that he was the number one politician in Cape Breton. 
 of 1970s Those Cape the would . 1960s was you , into the through me , agree back number him Breton and 1980s the in with politician he who that and 1950s knew in one the
 him he knew me , one 1960s back the you , through with and that the into the 1980s was politician agree and Breton number Cape in of who would the 1950s Those . in 1970s
 agree , back Breton the and with one 1960s you who , knew would 1950s through the me number in in 1980s Those of and he was him the Cape that . into the politician 1970s
 the the me you agree would was who back Cape knew and in him with through that 1960s number Those politician Breton 1950s the 1970s the he 1980s of in into , and , one .
 through who him Cape 1950s the the into in agree 1980s he , was Breton the that of with Those the in knew me number back would and and politician , one 1970s . you 1960s
 1980s the back one into the 1950s 1960s him , that number Those Breton politician and with through . of in me the who knew you he 1970s agree , in and was the Cape would
 him the with Breton politician that Those 1950s and me , of 1970s number would Cape back who the knew you into the one 1960s in and 1980s he agree , was the in through .
 the would the me he and one Breton and , that knew into Those , 1970s of the you through him 1960s who Cape number the agree . 1980s back was in 1950s politician in with
 , number the Cape him 1970s 1950s one into would Breton you who . the politician Those of 1980s the and and 1960s in he was knew the through agree that , back in with me
 he 1950s in was number , into 1970s the Breton the 1980s with Those you and who 1960s Cape back him one would me , and politician knew the that the of in through agree .
 one knew Breton number would in in . you the who agree back 1960s , the 1970s the Cape and with and politician into Those he of , that me 1950s 1980s him was through the
 into , him back the he would agree in and Cape 1980s with Those the was 1950s one through knew the of . that the Breton who and 1960s number politician , you me in 1970s
 1960s 1950s 1970s me you back 1980s with agree would , Breton Cape politician and one in the Those , the was the the that into number he through in who and him . of knew
 one in in . of and who , the me 1950s knew you 1970s agree Breton 1980s , politician the Those with he that was the the 1960s and through Cape would into number back him
 was me 1950s in 1970s through and knew Cape you would the in the back . the one that into number 1980s 1960s he with , and the of who Breton , politician him agree Those
 one and and agree politician that would me number he , the with him you the knew the into through Breton 1970s , 1960s was . 1980s 1950s Cape Those the back in in of who
However, the Liberals were in power a lot longer, so they are much more responsible.  
Retirement and earnings tests for individuals were eliminated in 1974. 
Benefits were provided to male and female contributors, to surviving spouses and dependent children. 
However, instead of taking it out of general revenue, the government took it out of the CPP because, in the old days, there was lots of money in that fund. 
There were not as many old people. 
There was a great number of working people, and lots of cash. 
They said, "We can throw it around." 
No one was thinking what would happen when people in the large demographic group turned 65.  
The amendments provided for the elimination of CPP children's benefits which previously applied - they changed it again - where more than four children of a deceased or disabled contributor had been eligible for such benefits. 
Now, if you have more than four kids, that is fine, too. 
However, it was another increased cost to what should be a pension plan. 
The government should have taken the money out of something else, or increased the amount of CPP premiums so that people were told the truth, and also told, "To pay for this it will cost you 10 cents or 20 cents more a month." 
The cash was there, so they used that cash.  
Legislation was enacted for spousal credits. 
When people get divorced, they have to keep up with the times. 
They can split the benefits. 
That was not done before. 
At the inception of this program, that was not allowed.  
Because men die earlier and women live longer, the money went mostly to women. 
It costs more money. 
 Those of you who knew him back in the 1950s and 1960s , through the 1970s and into the 1980s , would agree with me that was the number one politician in Cape Breton .
 with knew 1960s and politician the that you Those the would number 1970s he in the of me who 1980s him , the Cape through and , one in agree Breton 1950s was . back
 , the was with 1960s agree number through knew of back 1950s the in you Cape 1970s politician who the me in and he Breton the into would Those and him one that 1980s .
 and in into one 1980s agree through knew Those . Cape and Breton the 1970s 1960s in of me politician the him that back number , would the 1950s with who you the was ,
He was a giant at the podium. 
 podium a at He giant was the .
 He at giant a the was . podium
 the podium was giant a at . He
 at was He . podium the giant a
 at a was the podium giant . He
 He podium the at giant a . was
 . was He at podium a giant the
 He was podium . the a at giant
 at was the . giant a podium He
 a . at giant podium was He the
 He the . was giant podium at a
 the a He podium . at giant was
 giant at . He was podium a the
 . was He at the podium a giant
 He giant a was at podium the .
 giant was the a podium at He .
Demolition of Government Laboratories-Possibility of Restoration of Funding-Government Position 
(Response to question raised by Hon. Mira Spivak on November 20, 1997) 
In response to the federal government's Program Review, the Canadian Forest Service (CFS) underwent strategic restructuring to rationalize its operations and to reduce infrastructure costs in the interest of providing maximum funding to research within the context of a reduced operating budget. 
As a consequence, Petawawa National Forest Institute (PNFI) was identified as one of the several Natural Resources Canada (NRCan) operations to be closed as part of a redefined departmental initiative to refocus our Science and Technology (S&T) programs. 
These programs address issues of national and international significance and service our clients through stronger, more effective partnerships with the provinces, industry and other players in the forest sector. 
All the major programs from PNFI have been transferred to the five current CFS research Centres and accordingly the majority of basic research activities from PNFI are ongoing. 
Claims of expenditure for upgrades prior to decommissioning were in fact for operational maintenance, purchase of equipment and some site enhancements. 
With the closure of the site all research equipment and transportable assets relevant to ongoing program activities have been moved to other CFS research Centres with their respective researcher's programs.  
The final phase of deconstruction has been delayed twice in order to seek alternate tenants for the townsite. 
The site in its current state represents a safety risk both in terms of security and liability and requires significant annual expenditures for heating and infrastructure to simply be maintained.  
Answers to Order Paper Questions Tabled 
Energy-Department of the Environment-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) table the answer to Question No. 13 on the Order Paper-by Senator Kenny.  
Energy-Department of Justice-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) table the answer to Question No. 26 on the Order Paper-by Senator Kenny.  
Energy-Department of Multiculturalism-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) table the answer to Question No. 31 on the Order Paper-by Senator Kenny.  
Energy-Department of Natural Resources-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) table the answer to Question No. 34 on the Order Paper-by Senator Kenny.  
Defence-Status of Clothe the Soldier Project 
 was a giant at the podium .
 podium a He the . was at
 giant a was podium at . He
 at was giant a podium the .
In the 1967 provincial election, he became so excited during a speech that he hit the podium so hard that he literally broke it in two. 
 1967 so . In during , hit a that election provincial in broke the so excited he two literally hard podium he that the became it he speech
 the became speech so during . , he literally hit podium In 1967 hard he excited provincial in it election a that so broke he two that the
 podium so he election became he the he two provincial 1967 that so hit in a hard that In during speech the excited broke , literally it .
 speech during a excited literally podium 1967 the broke it he that so two provincial election became hard the in , . he he In hit so that
 hard the hit in provincial that so , became the a speech he election he In so two . 1967 excited literally he during that podium it broke
 1967 two that the in election , it excited a speech literally hard provincial podium In he broke he became during . he so so the hit that
 a speech broke during election the excited so two In 1967 literally he it that , he hit he in became the podium provincial . that so hard
 in he 1967 election he podium he that a so speech excited provincial during , became two . the broke that literally In it the so hard hit
 broke it that , he hard two he so . election literally that excited In so became podium hit in he speech the provincial 1967 a the during
 became he broke In that so excited literally the election speech a two podium , the he it . he so provincial that during hit in hard 1967
 two election 1967 it so that speech In podium he hit hard he excited provincial a became literally , . the the during that he in broke so
 became . hard excited so two he that 1967 so during he broke a provincial In the he that in the it speech , hit literally election podium
 1967 so he broke excited literally during election the two hit . provincial became podium that speech that the a in , In it he hard so he
 . so that it he that two became during , hit he the election 1967 provincial hard so podium he the a speech In excited broke literally in
 in podium 1967 that two so . election In , it so during he hard he the speech became excited hit broke a literally the provincial that he
 he broke he In that , the election 1967 he during two it the speech provincial podium hard literally so became hit excited so a that . in
The Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C-17, to amend the Telecommunications Act and the Teleglobe Canada Reorganization and Divestiture Act. 
Bill read first time.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this bill be read the second time?  
On motion of Senator Carstairs, bill placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading on Thursday, December 11, 1997.  
Canada Marine Bill 
First Reading 
The Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C-9, for making the system of Canadian ports competitive, efficient and commercially oriented, providing for the establishing of port authorities and the divesting of certain harbours and ports, for the commercialization of the St. Lawrence Seaway and ferry services and other matters related to maritime trade and transport and amending the Pilotage Act and amending and repealing other Acts as a consequence.  
Bill read first time.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this bill be read the second time?  
On motion of Senator Carstairs, bill placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading on Thursday, December 11, 1997.  
Aboriginal Peoples 
Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples-Committee Authorized to Study Recommendations 
Hon. Charlie Watt , pursuant to notice of December 8, 1997, moved: 
That the Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal Peoples be authorized to examine and report upon the recommendations of the Royal Commission Report on Aboriginal Peoples (Sessional paper 2/35-508.) 
respecting Aboriginal governance and, in particular, seek the comments of Aboriginal peoples and of other interested parties on: 
2. the mechanisms of implementing such new structural relationships and; 
3. the models of Aboriginal self-government required to respond to the needs of Aboriginal peoples and to complement these new structural relationships; and 
That the Committee present its report no later than November 30, 1999. 
 In 1967 provincial election , he became so excited during a speech that he hit the podium so hard that he literally broke it in two .
 the so two speech hit literally so he it a he , In became excited that . podium that hard during in 1967 election provincial broke he
 the so he excited a hard he provincial podium hit he , became speech broke that 1967 in . that the during In two literally election it
 excited election broke hit literally In two he that became speech , it provincial during podium that hard the so 1967 a . he so the in
It fell on the floor. 
 on fell floor the It .
 fell the It floor . on
 fell . It on floor the
 fell It the . floor on
 on . fell It floor the
 fell on floor It the .
 . the floor fell It on
 It . on fell floor the
 . floor It fell the on
 . the fell on floor It
 floor on . It fell the
 floor on the It fell .
 on fell . the It floor
 on fell . the floor It
 It floor fell . the on
 on . the fell It floor
Look through the bill. 
It is simply paying more money for less benefits. 
Anyone can do that. 
Even the Liberals can do that.  
The government is unable to manage the present program so it wants more money to enable it to manage it better. 
We must remember that the author of Bill C-2 is Paul Martin. 
Paul Martin is a real smart guy. 
We remember that he had to stoop to bribing three Atlantic provinces, with other people's money, to fulfil his promises of harmonization. 
He later apologized to the Canadian people for misinforming them.  
Meanwhile, the Prime Minister and Deputy Prime Minister, Sheila Copps, were promising to get rid of the GST, but they did not really mean it, they said, although they were caught out on tape not telling the truth.  
Paul Martin promised in the old Red Book that the government would cancel the helicopter purchase and use the money to pay for more social programs. 
Now, $900 million later, we have no helicopters that fly safely. 
He penned the Red Book to renegotiate the free trade agreement. 
He took all the kudos after the 1993 election.  
Now he says: "Rush Bill C-2. 
Trust me." 
The minister says that he needs the bill now to satisfy an agreement with the provinces. 
I have heard of no agreement. 
No one here has heard of an agreement. 
If someone on the other side knows of an agreement, please tell me.  
 It fell on the floor
 the floor on . fell
 on the floor It .
 fell . the on It
I do not know how many of you had the opportunity that I had - I do not think you did, Senator Graham - of hearing him make political speeches. 
 , I not of did make political many . of not do Graham think opportunity Senator do the - that him how you - you speeches had hearing know I I had
 not - , of do I I you - I . think had had you Graham many opportunity him how the not know hearing did political of do Senator that make speeches
 speeches Senator not you - the political . know do many think I do I , had of did that make hearing how Graham had opportunity you - I not him of
 think not had him many I of of you - not political I make . how the that you do opportunity do know , hearing - did I Senator speeches had Graham
 speeches that I not opportunity had how him I many . do not - did make do I the you - Graham you of had know hearing political , Senator think of
 the Graham had - . political I I speeches make did that I had opportunity do you think him do hearing of , many Senator of - you know not how not
 do I make Graham that the not Senator political how of - - him I I did many . know had you of you think speeches not do , hearing opportunity had
 him do had Graham had I do , - you you . did know Senator think how many of of not not I that make speeches political I hearing the opportunity -
 . not , you had of know think many that political I you I hearing not do had of did the - how make I - Senator do Graham opportunity him speeches
 do speeches make know you I I Graham I political . the of many hearing had that him not , of had - Senator do think did opportunity - how not you
 I did how not had I of the Senator Graham not I do you you know hearing speeches many , - - think make that opportunity do of him political . had
 Senator of think - . how - of do that I I you opportunity had know , Graham did political make do many had him I the not you not speeches hearing
 of hearing do not I political did speeches opportunity many Graham do had had that think him not - you I , you make Senator of . how - I know the
 do did know you had - speeches not of I the not Graham Senator - opportunity many how , I make political you had do think hearing of . him that I
 had him had - do political hearing the do . Senator you Graham - how think not , not of that I know I you make many did opportunity speeches of I
 you know think of I had the hearing - him speeches Senator had of political you not , do . did not - do I that I how many make Graham opportunity
It is not public money. 
No one is forced to invest in Royal Trust.  
Senator Gigantès :
The public is made up of individuals. 
These individuals are private persons. 
Under the proposed system, they would invest in something which may not make huge profits, but which will not experience the disasters of the private sector.  
Senator Bolduc :
It is a matter of choice. 
Senator Gigantès :
With a system such as the one proposed, one thing is for sure. 
There will be no Trevor Eyton to squander the money, there will be no Conrad Black or Olympia & York to take it away from you.  
Senator Bolduc :
I do not want to answer questions on specific cases, because I find it objectionable.  
Hon. Gerry St. Germain :
Honourable senators, the honourable senator who has just spoken brings a wealth of experience to this chamber. 
He was one of the top bureaucrats and one of the top men in the Quebec government at one time. 
He brings that experience to this forum.  
I would prefer to ask this question of the government side, but no one will speak further on it. 
Therefore, I will ask Senator Bolduc.  
This involves a question that I asked Senator Kirby yesterday. 
 I do not know how many of you had the opportunity that I had I do not think you did , Senator Graham - of hearing him make political speeches .
 I opportunity make that him did how you hearing had not - Graham I do political of speeches of not do know think . Senator the - you I , many
 , do had opportunity that hearing make of not you Senator not I political the many speeches I think - . Graham you know do him of did had how I
 I Graham - make the you hearing . of Senator think - not many had not had him political do did I you I know opportunity that how , speeches of
"Pinky" Gaum, who had spoken before him, broke the first podium and John M. broke the second, but that did not bother him one bit. 
 him . bit before the Gaum broke . who one Pinky " " second podium not him the , M had and , bother did , broke John spoken first that but
 second " . , him " Gaum bit and had the who the podium that him not broke , , bother John spoken Pinky . first one before did but broke M
 M bother Gaum Pinky him who had but him spoken podium " bit " before and . broke the broke second one , not first , the , that . did John
 second bit but " and Gaum who had podium did the the broke , before spoken bother first , . John him broke , not him " that Pinky one M .
 . second broke " before Gaum M and one spoken him bit , Pinky him . who John broke not had but did podium the first the that bother , , "
 . M him the who but , John not Gaum spoken " broke first did second and , broke the bit had Pinky before , that podium " one him . bother
 that the him Pinky . who first broke did Gaum M him , John bother had , the second before . bit spoken one broke " " and podium not but ,
 but M broke him did who , podium second broke and that . spoken bother Pinky the the one bit " first Gaum , John , " had not . before him
 broke the . but " not before the had that him " did , , first one , bother podium Gaum and broke second bit John Pinky . M who him spoken
 broke bother who podium spoken Pinky did , . the before him that , John " M first broke , and one " him Gaum but . second the not bit had
 that M bother podium the who , not and bit broke him him had " did . spoken broke but the , one John , . Pinky first " second before Gaum
 " did Gaum him broke spoken podium Pinky one the " second who broke that , , before bit and first . but . had not him John , the bother M
 Gaum broke one John the bother second who podium , the . spoken . " , , did but before " M not had him first broke Pinky him and that bit
 . " , podium broke John the that . who did first bit , broke bother one M had him Gaum second before " , and but him Pinky not spoken the
 before " Gaum , that him who , bit the Pinky " . broke did the but broke and bother had first , spoken M podium second one not John him .
 Pinky , but before that had not M broke did who . spoken and broke the , first " him the bit " podium Gaum one second . , John him bother
Even more to the point, the authors of the Constitution Act recognized that section 93's limitations to two privileged Christian beliefs would conflict with the Charter's anti-discrimination implications, so much so that section 93 was provided immunity from the Charter in section 29. 
Indeed, section 29 could not be clearer. 
It reads as follows: 
Nothing in this Charter abrogates or derogates from any rights or privileges guaranteed by or under the Constitution of Canada in respect of denominational, separate or dissentient schools.  
Why the issue of confessional schools as well as other issues crying out for change, such as Senate reform, were left untouched during the long debate before and during patriation and surrounding the Constitution Act itself is for those who were there at the time to explain. 
Certainly a golden opportunity was lost to give Canada a basic law more in tune with modern Canadian society, except for the adoption of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 
Even it is not without its flaws, not the least being the notwithstanding clause which can be subjected to abuse. 
Perhaps all of this is a reflection of the one constant which has marked Canada since its origins, a country identified by its extraordinary political and social diversity and contradictions.  
In any event, we are faced with a request from the Quebec National Assembly to be removed from the obligations to maintain formal Catholic and Protestant school structures in the cities of Montreal and Quebec City and to maintain minority or dissentient Catholic and Protestant schools outside those areas at the request of minority Catholic or Protestant parents, as the case may be. 
Provincial legislation to establish linguistic schools is already being put into effect. 
These can be established without amending section 93. 
Quebec, however, points out that to have multiple school systems can only lead to overlapping, duplication, and confusion, with all their attendant additional costs.  
In addition, religious education as provided for in section 93 is reconfirmed in the province's Education Act, which by itself may be reassuring at first glance, but not in reality as it is a protection which is simply not as iron-clad as a constitutional guarantee.  
When the Education Act, Bill 107, was passed in 1994, the National Assembly agreed to apply the notwithstanding clause so that the privileges given to denominations in section 93 could not be successfully challenged under the Charter. 
Notwithstanding clauses expire every five years and this one is up in 1999. Will it be re-enacted? 
The Parti Québécois, in opposition, voted against it at the time. 
The two ministers who appeared before the joint committee would not reveal their party's position, preferring to await a broad consultation before stating it. 
An uninformed guess, however, leads me to believe that, if the Parti Québécois still forms the government two years hence, the notwithstanding clause will not be renewed, thereby leading to the gradual removal of Catholic and Protestant teaching in public schools as we know it today.  
In rebuttal to this, many will point to a letter sent to the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs by the Bishop of Baie-Comeau on behalf of the Assembly of Quebec Bishops. 
It is dated September 30, 1997, and appears as Appendix H in the joint committee report. 
 Pinky " Gaum , who had spoken before him , broke the first podium and John M . broke the second , but that did not bother him one bit .
 " podium the before second had , and . broke broke him first who , spoken " . M Pinky that Gaum bother , the one him John not bit did
 had broke that spoken before " . . podium John did the the and but one broke him bit bother who M , second him Gaum Pinky , , first "
 but Pinky before broke broke podium the " him had , , one who the first second John " that did bother , and Gaum spoken bit M not . him
He continued with his speech without missing a beat. 
 missing continued without a with . beat He his speech
 a his missing beat He speech continued without with .
 his continued . missing a speech without with beat He
 a speech with continued beat missing his . without He
 without He speech . his beat with missing a continued
 He without speech continued a . with beat missing his
 speech . missing a He beat his without continued with
 beat missing his . with speech a He continued without
 a missing . He continued his without beat speech with
 his beat missing continued without a speech with . He
 beat his with continued missing speech a . without He
 a missing his beat He continued . without with speech
 missing speech a continued . his beat He with without
 with He a without continued . missing speech his beat
 . speech beat missing a without his with He continued
 beat with without He . continued speech his a missing
On the Catholic side, we had the position of the archbishops, as limited as it was. 
We had Catholic school boards and Catholic teachers. 
I remember specifically cross-examining Catholic teachers and asking whether they had discussions with students and their parents respecting the changes. 
Their view was that they represented the broad consensus of parents and students as it applied to this amendment. 
All parents wanted a change to renovate the school system, and this was the best modality in which to do that.  
I agree with Senator Lynch-Staunton, Senator Wood and Senator Lavoie-Roux that this is not perfect. 
However, in addition to the evidence, we did refer to opinion polls that seemed to suggest a strong support for reform along these lines.  
Yes, the resolution is imperfect. 
We would like to have done it "our way," as Frank Sinatra used to say, but we must deal with the Province of Quebec in this case. 
We had to bend imperfect tools to see whether they fit our minimum requirements. 
In my view, they did not fit our minimum requirements; they fit our reasonable requirements for constitutional amendment.  
Senator Wood :
Is it not true in the letter from the bishops of Quebec - the letter the honourable senator read - that they were in favour of repealing section 93? 
They questioned linguistic rights and suggested that denominational guarantees established by 107 be maintained. 
There was a caveat there that my honourable friend forgot to read.  
Senator Grafstein :
I find myself in great difficulty defending Roman Catholic theology let alone letters from Roman Catholic archbishops. 
I will leave it to each senator to come to his or her own conclusion on the testimony and on the letters, which are appended to the report.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Honourable senators, Senator Grafstein is quite right in stating that reform is needed. 
 He continued with his speech without a beat .
 continued speech a missing with without He his beat
 He with missing without continued a beat speech his
 his without continued He speech missing a . beat
He was number one in my books and in the books of many other people throughout Cape Breton and Nova Scotia. 
 books Breton my of throughout number in and many people the one books Scotia Cape was Nova in . and He other
 Scotia was many other of Breton in books . the Nova one in number my and throughout Cape people and books He
 and my of was He in . Breton books and the throughout Cape one Nova in people many books other number Scotia
 many number throughout Breton people Cape books the and in He and one Scotia of other in my books was . Nova
 in throughout Nova books Scotia of . number other many He Cape one was books and in people the my and Breton
 and books Cape the in other Breton Nova people one throughout my and books was . He of many in Scotia number
 Nova number throughout books books and was of other . in people Breton my He in one the Scotia many and Cape
 He other Cape was Nova . my people number throughout Scotia in in and books one many and Breton of books the
 one Breton in and of books other books many Scotia throughout . was He in Cape Nova the my and number people
 many Breton and and throughout Nova . in people books books the He other number was my one of in Cape Scotia
 the of was my . and number one Breton many He other Scotia in and Cape people books books throughout Nova in
 books the books number Cape throughout in and in many and my one people Nova Scotia was . of He Breton other
 . the He and throughout in other my Cape Scotia books in Nova books number Breton of and people one many was
 of Nova was . the and books Cape He one books and throughout people in many my Scotia Breton other in number
 number of in Breton throughout the books people books was in He Cape . one Nova my Scotia other and and many
 people He in and throughout was other of books Breton in my books Cape the and . Nova many Scotia number one
That is what section 93 says.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
No, section 93 does not say that.  
Senator Grafstein :
The Province of Quebec, by its lawfully elected assembly, has requested a resolution amending the Constitution. 
How can I ask them to respect the Constitution if I do not respect the Constitution? 
I respect the Constitution.  
Honourable senators, this is a lawful request done in a lawful way. 
Perhaps certain words are egregious, but it is done in a lawful way, and I am prepared to support them. 
To my mind, the fact that they are prepared to proceed with their reforms before we legislate in any way, shape or form is their business; it is not my business. 
My business is to uphold the Constitution when they request we uphold processes under the Constitution.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
The reform of the school system in Quebec has nothing to do with the Constitution, even less with section 93. 
That was admitted in front of the committee.  
I will give you the answer to my question, and it should trouble all of us. 
The answer is that Quebec wants to be exempted from providing Catholic and Protestant teaching in the public school system. 
It has nothing to do with the linguistic school system, which will be in place - if the calendar is met - before the beginning of the next school year. 
They want to erase religious instruction from the school system, which is imposed on them. 
Narrow as it may be, unfair as it may be, and discriminatory as it may be, it was still renewed in 1982 and given protection from the Charter only 15 years ago. 
That is the reason. 
 He was number one in my books and in the books of many people throughout Cape Breton and Nova Scotia .
 and one in people other Cape throughout Breton books Nova Scotia of . the many in books He was my and
 number Cape Breton other in the in Scotia books and my . throughout Nova one of was many He and books
 and and was books in in Breton . throughout He people other Scotia Nova my books number the Cape one many
Over the last year and a half, I had the occasion and the pleasure of dropping in to see him once a month, sometimes twice a month, at his home and in a hospital that he always called "John's Hospital." 
 a home pleasure see the his " at occasion and Over him , and , hospital I in s once ' sometimes twice in a that month had the he called last and always , to Hospital of a half ." year dropping a the John month
 , s at had the I in pleasure ." in a Over sometimes occasion hospital that , a the a year dropping half , ' home called John his a " and always him once twice he last month to and the month see Hospital and of
 last year him , of a in month half had and a , ." pleasure John ' once he his occasion called , Hospital the and see sometimes a month a " s at home in Over I and that to hospital the dropping always the twice
 a twice home s Hospital a occasion in " his I , the see ." pleasure month once the a dropping year of at and , he that the called month to sometimes half and Over always , and hospital had ' John last in a him
 he a dropping to at , home last of " a in the occasion twice once ' always the the half month month had sometimes a that hospital John Over him called and , year , I ." pleasure a and in his Hospital s and see
 that hospital at a a pleasure Hospital Over and month home , always dropping and the to see sometimes ' s half occasion last in in once the twice " of I called he John the a had him a , his month year and , ."
 home his twice year John , , and at hospital in occasion see and the half once " he ." pleasure last that had a I the dropping always Over ' Hospital month in and the to , him s called sometimes a month a of a
 sometimes he twice , dropping year had the " Over home , and that to the half John last called ' month a , in hospital always see once in s and the at of him a and a Hospital ." occasion pleasure I month a his
 a ' pleasure the ." , year once always in John month at I his Over called Hospital see the " home dropping in had a twice s half a last to that a and him of month , sometimes occasion and the he , and hospital
 month at he pleasure a hospital of occasion , always and see home a the Over the his a ." " s John called dropping a year half that , in sometimes last to ' Hospital once had in , I twice and the and month him
 John once always a he year half the ." twice home Over ' , occasion him to sometimes " at s a hospital , and Hospital a a his see month , and last in the the of had dropping month I called pleasure that in and
 , John that sometimes see Hospital a the " pleasure twice in always home him year last at occasion had , s he ' and month I Over a called dropping the the hospital a his once month and and in , to half a ." of
 month pleasure and home , called " always and dropping see a at ' sometimes and month once a ." hospital Hospital in in had a last , him John his occasion Over the to of , year a I twice the half that he the s
 home see the and his hospital the a in , a had in Hospital a I and half called a s once at pleasure Over occasion year John and twice month that dropping " month always the last he to , of , ' ." him sometimes
 month the called , and a home had dropping last him sometimes that half see a , year always and and " his twice a the at Over once of hospital in a the in ' month he ." I s pleasure , to occasion Hospital John
 home Over always the ." , twice s , month in him and sometimes Hospital called a the a a at year the once he I of see in ' dropping his last occasion that " to John pleasure and , a half had month hospital and
We had a unanimous resolution in the National Assembly of Quebec, both parties, with two abstentions. 
The efforts made by the Quebec ministers seem to assure that a strong consensus had been obtained.  
We heard direct evidence from 68 groups composed of over 100 individual witnesses. 
Notwithstanding the short time-frames allotted in our terms of reference and as referenced by Senator Lynch-Staunton, the committee clearly heard every viewpoint that people wished to express.  
I hear Senator Wood. 
I will deal with her concerns in a moment.  
While some individual groups did not give evidence, as pointed out by Senator Wood, I concluded that, having examined the materials from those groups, that their viewpoint was indeed expressed by others during the course of those hearings. 
I believe no viewpoint was excluded from our deliberations.  
The time frames in the hearings in no way diminished the committee's ability to obtain or weigh the evidence. 
The committee made a thorough investigation of that evidence. 
No point of view went unexamined, save for one raised by the Reform Party at the last minute, and I will deal with that later.  
Let me for a moment repeat what we heard. 
There was a unanimous resolution, save for two abstentions, from the Quebec assembly. 
We heard from the opposition in the assembly; the Quebec government itself; English and French school boards; Catholic, Protestant and other teachers' groups; archbishops of the Roman Catholic church and the Anglican archbishop of Quebec, which I will deal with later; minority groups including Jewish, Arab, non-Roman Catholic and other allophone groups; students groups, both English and French. 
All agreed that linguistic school boards, which were a direct consequence of this amendment, were desirable and progressive.  
There was some dissent. 
I will briefly touch on it, as did Senator Bolduc in his most insightful speech, especially with respect to the plight of certain French-speaking Protestants and certain English-speaking Catholics. 
There is no question at all that some in those groups feel detrimentally affected.  
Again, under the current Quebec law 109, the notwithstanding clauses had been included, both with respect to the Quebec Charter and the federal Charter of Rights and Freedoms, therefore allowing for denominational teaching to be continued in Quebec. 
How the Quebec government will ultimately continue to afford opportunities for denominational teaching is a much more difficult question to predict. 
 Over the last year and a half , I had occasion and the pleasure of dropping in to see him once a month , sometimes twice a month , at his home and in a hospital that he always called " John ' s Hospital ."
 in and and see a always pleasure month occasion had called the sometimes ." dropping to the twice a " last of I s once a that a his at home ' half and he month in Over , year Hospital , him hospital the ,
 at in and half Over occasion dropping he a always the home Hospital the , see a ." him and and a year hospital called ' his , of to " , once I sometimes month month pleasure a last John s had the that twice
 in I in and once the , Over year the a a home his hospital had half him called last to that at ." month sometimes , s month the he twice , and " Hospital dropping of see occasion always ' pleasure a John and
That is the hospital in Sydney Mines, which we built and which has borne my name since I opened it. 
 Sydney and , borne it since Mines is the we opened I in . which has which my built name hospital That
 it in is the since borne has which we which built . and opened Mines I That , Sydney my name hospital
 borne , my hospital That which we since built is Sydney opened Mines has I which name . the it and in
 Mines Sydney I is and which in we borne since built has it which my opened . name That the , hospital
 and which That my hospital the Sydney . I which since name we Mines built opened is it borne in , has
 name opened we and the hospital built in has it borne my is That . since Mines Sydney which , I which
 which is built hospital which the we Sydney in it opened name borne . That I and has Mines , my since
 which the built is we which name hospital borne in Mines Sydney my That I opened has , since and . it
 name is , it the which Mines in we Sydney hospital and has since I opened which my That . borne built
 and I built hospital That borne my opened we Mines in is which name . it the has since , which Sydney
 it the which That in Sydney name opened and since is hospital . has borne which built , we I Mines my
 my built Sydney name That I hospital opened is it Mines and . which we the borne which , has in since
 which built has . name since opened , my Mines hospital it and is That which we in the Sydney borne I
 and That in name since we , is hospital built borne which my . it Sydney Mines has I which opened the
 hospital Mines my borne it which Sydney is the we which since I , opened That built . name has and in
 my the hospital is . Mines has , we I opened built That it since in Sydney and which name which borne
Experts in constitutional law have said that the amendment could have a surprising impact, far beyond the limited effects usually referred to in the media. 
The public may have trouble grasping the real scope of what is happening or making its views known because it does not have access to the necessary information and means of communication. 
It must therefore be acknowledged that if Parliament grants the request, public support for the amendment is less certain than support for the creation of linguistic school boards....  
Bill 109 - 
- which is the Quebec Education Act passed in June - 
- upholds the principle of freedom of choice in schooling. 
However, the debates of the Joint Committee of the House of Commons and Senate highlighted the fact that the legislation in this area will be jeopardized the moment Quebec is excluded from the application of subsections 1 to 4 of section 93. 
The Committee therefore believes that the amendment could turn out to be something of a time bomb unless the Quebec government is prepared to renew the notwithstanding clauses or look for a better alternative that would allow it to retain in practical terms its authority to enact legislation on denominational schools....  
Finally: 
The Catholic Committee therefore strongly urges the Government of Quebec to immediately find a legal provision, constitutional or otherwise, that would allow it to strike a balance between the requirements of the Charters, including the requirements of section 41 of the Quebec Charter, and the legitimate expectations expressed by the public. 
Such a provision would rid the government of the dilemma described above concerning the use or elimination of the notwithstanding clauses. 
More importantly, it would allow a genuine democratic debate over a new social pact in the area of religious education.  
Given their authorship, I think we have to reflect seriously on these thoughts.  
Before we finally vote, honourable senators, I trust that when the resolution itself is before us we can go into Committee of the Whole to hear any witness who was not heard by the joint committee and whose reflections will guide us. 
In particular, I refer to the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs who, after all, is the sponsor of this resolution on behalf of the Government of Canada. 
He is as well placed as anyone to reply to concerns expressed here and elsewhere. 
I would expect that he would welcome the opportunity to do so before a vote is taken.  
I feel strongly that the minister must share his views with this house and engage in an open and frank exchange directly with its members. 
I urge the leadership on the other side to arrange such a meeting at the earliest opportunity.  
There are still too many unanswered questions and disturbing uncertainties for many senators on both sides of this house to state a firm position at this time. 
 That is the hospital in Sydney Mines , we built and which has borne my name since I opened it .
 the Sydney has since name my Mines built is which I it borne and That opened , hospital we . in
 my hospital we built opened That borne Sydney has the since . and I in name Mines is it , which
 has which Sydney I name we opened borne is the . Mines my That hospital which since built it and in
I had called and asked Joe, his nephew, "Is John M. at home or is he in hospital?" 
 . John , he " nephew or M , had in called his ?" Joe is Is I home at and asked hospital
 ?" John is Is , . Joe , I had M nephew " asked and hospital in at his home he or called
 " or asked , Is at M in , home and called nephew had ?" Joe John his he . I hospital is
 he home his or M called " nephew in ?" and John . , hospital at I Is asked Joe had , is
 home hospital nephew " or M Joe had in at his I asked he . ?" , called John and Is , is
 . had , he at and John called I or is Joe " asked Is home nephew ?" hospital his M , in
 , he home ?" hospital nephew " John I Joe in , and asked Is his at . had called or is M
 " ?" and , at Joe Is home is , John . I his in or had M asked hospital nephew called he
 I . he , asked nephew Is or his called Joe hospital ?" home John had , at is " M and in
 hospital Joe , and I is called ?" his M at John asked had nephew home he Is in . or , "
 Is in and is at nephew called " his asked ?" John I . he M , Joe had home or hospital ,
 is in ?" he , John Is had hospital I or at his home " and M , . asked Joe nephew called
 . I hospital in called " had his ?" and M at or Is Joe , , is home asked John he nephew
 Joe and Is home ?" " I is called at M in nephew asked John . , he hospital had or his ,
 and Is . Joe had I asked or his at he " is called , nephew hospital home in M John ?" ,
 hospital is at . , or Joe John asked " nephew ?" , home his called I he and Is in M had
Honourable senators, with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58(1) h ), I move, seconded by the Honourable Senator De Bané: 
That when the Senate adjourns today, it do stand adjourned until tomorrow, Wednesday, December 10, 1997, at 1:30 p.m. 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is leave granted, honourable senators?  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
Motion agreed to.  
International Assembly of French-Speaking Parliamentarians 
Meeting held in Luxembourg-Report of Canadian Section Tabled 
Hon. Pierre De Bané :
Honourable senators, pursuant to rule 23(6) of the Senate, I have the honour to present, in both official languages, the reports of the Canadian section of the International Assembly of French-Speaking Parliamentarians as well as the financial report of the 23rd regular session of the IAFSP and its executive committee, held in Luxembourg from July 7 to July 10, 1997.  
Foreign Affairs 
Committee Authorized to Meet During Sitting of the Senate 
Hon. John B. Stewart :
Honourable senators, with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58(1)( a ), I move: 
That the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs have power to sit at 3:15 p.m. tomorrow, Wednesday, December 10, even though the Senate may then be sitting, and that rule 95(4) be suspended in relation thereto.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is leave granted, honourable senators?  
Hon. Noël A. Kinsella (Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition) :
Honourable senators, in the past two years or so, there has been a common understanding in this chamber that Wednesdays would constitute a short day. 
 I had called asked Joe , his nephew , " Is John M . at home or is he in hospital ?"
 hospital , called he in . or ?" M " had and Is , his asked home nephew I is at Joe
 at had or ?" M called in and I Joe nephew . hospital his asked John , Is , " he is
 , in I M " . ?" he Is nephew home and John , asked at hospital or his called Joe is
He said, "He is in your hospital," and I knew immediately he was in the Sydney Mines Hospital.  
 Hospital Mines said in in immediately He knew , the . was he your I hospital is and He " ," Sydney
 . the Hospital " in and , He he I knew hospital Mines is immediately ," in said was your Sydney He
 hospital is ," Mines he I He , was knew the in and " He . immediately said your Sydney Hospital in
 in the He ," He he is Hospital Mines I Sydney knew and was in immediately " . , hospital your said
 " I He was Mines said ," in He the he in knew your is hospital Hospital and . , Sydney immediately
 I He your Mines was immediately " Sydney knew . ," he in the He is , in said hospital and Hospital
 " Sydney , immediately was Hospital He Mines said is and . ," He the your in knew he hospital in I
 and I . He is hospital , your Sydney knew Mines was " he in said in Hospital He the immediately ,"
 your immediately Sydney the is in knew he in He . and was Hospital said ," hospital I Mines , He "
 in the ," . is I in Sydney he He " , hospital was He immediately your said Mines Hospital and knew
 in Sydney . was your I is ," and the hospital He immediately , said " Mines He knew Hospital in he
 He the your . I ," hospital " and , immediately Hospital He he said in knew Mines was Sydney is in
 was ," said Sydney . the knew and Mines in I hospital is immediately , He He your in he Hospital "
 Sydney is Mines he hospital Hospital your , " . was I said and He immediately He in ," in the knew
 Sydney in he the and Hospital is hospital knew I He your in . He immediately " was , ," Mines said
 is he Sydney Hospital was I He , . in and ," said He " immediately the hospital in your knew Mines
Now, how are these 800 to be selected and monitored? 
There is likely to be arbitrariness and patronage.  
In addition, the Board will be everywhere and inevitably set conditions. 
Businesses will have to toe the line as the provinces do when Ottawa doles out conditional funding, as you may recall. 
This concentration of power, this centralization will be unhealthy. 
This technocracy and its perverse effects make me nervous. 
I hope one day we will have nothing worse than Mr. Sorros' manoeuvres to criticize.  
The regulations governing investments and the behaviour of administrators have not been revealed. 
They are not ready. 
What guidelines will there be for administrators? 
A parliamentary review is therefore vital before their implementation.  
In concluding, I would say to the government that the preferable alternative to its bill would be to simply oblige everyone in the labour force in Canada to invest a percentage of their savings in funds under private management or let government assume its role by providing a safety net for those who could not set aside enough money for their old age.  
Here is an intelligent response to the challenge before us. 
However, and it is regrettable in this era of the welfare state, it seems to me that we prefer to make sweeping rules that apply to everyone in order to resolve the problem of a few.  
Hon. Philippe Deane Gigantès :
You talk with admiration of private investment management. 
How do you explain the disaster at Olympia & York, for example, under the management of Mr. Eyton, our colleague, and the fact that major players like Conrad Black closed Dominion Stores and took the money Dominion Stores employees had invested in a pension fund, a fund they never drew from? 
Are you telling us that the private sector will be more generous and wise than the Caisse de dépôt in Quebec? 
Senator Bolduc :
I did not say disasters did not happen in the private sector. 
 He , " He is in your hospital ," and I knew immediately he was in the Sydney Mines Hospital .
 I He hospital Mines immediately in knew Sydney . said in , and ," Hospital was he He is the "
 said was " in and ," He your Hospital . he Mines immediately He the is , I hospital Sydney in
 Hospital Mines immediately was the ," is " He said I in he hospital and , your . Sydney knew in
I would go in to see him in the hospital in North Sydney, or drop in to see him in his home. 
 or go North , in would I him the in in see his see to in home to Sydney hospital him . drop in
 in go see , him North Sydney him his the in would in to see or in hospital drop to home in I .
 hospital in in the him see , . or I in would North see go Sydney drop to his to in in home him
 see to hospital the I in to Sydney , him his home see him in drop in North or . would go in in
 in in see . North him home in in in him see go to his hospital Sydney would to or drop the , I
 him in to in I his to . drop , hospital in see home or would him in North the go Sydney in see
 would hospital in see Sydney his in see , or him in in in home North to I . drop the to him go
 . his hospital or would , go in North to home in see I in in Sydney him drop see the in to him
 , hospital in see home Sydney drop him the I in or go see in would . North in him to in to his
 in him I in Sydney in see in go see to him North to , . the hospital or would home in drop his
 , in him in to in his I . in the North to Sydney or go see drop see hospital home him would in
 go I North drop see home see to would in or in his , in the hospital him him to in Sydney in .
 , him . I the see see drop in in go to him home North in would in his Sydney hospital to or in
 see home see him to . North in Sydney to would his him in in in in , or I go hospital the drop
 him in go see in his would or Sydney in in to home hospital . I drop in the see to him , North
 him , him drop in go North see see to would to Sydney in in or I . in home the in hospital his
Honourable senators, I wish to address my question to the Leader of the Government in the Senate. 
It dates back to October 1, 1997, to a question asked at that time by Senator Meighen, which is only 51 days ago.  
I will quote Senator Meighen, who said: 
It has been 51 days!  
On November 25, I said the following: 
In a paper released the week prior to November 25, the Association of Canadian Pension Management said that the Seniors Benefit will stifle savings. 
To quote from their paper: 
Middle-income Canadians might simply decide to supplement government programs through the accumulation of non-income producing capital, such as homes or interest-free mortgages for their children. 
They may simply avoid retirement savings plans that generate heavily taxed income...  
They go on to suggest that Ottawa structure the Seniors Benefit in such a way that it will not result in an effective tax rate in excess of 50 per cent.  
Was the government listening when I asked that question? 
Senator Graham said, "Of course, yes." 
Did the Leader of the Government in the Senate read The Financial Post editorial that morning in which it was recommended that this problem be changed to reflect such an issue? 
From what I understand, in the other place all amendments have been struck down and no further amendments are coming forward. 
As we know, no amendments were passed.  
Changes to pension legislation represents one of the largest issues facing seniors as they move into retirement. 
Seniors, as a whole, do not know about these changes. 
Has the government developed a communications plan to inform Canadians of this issue prior to the passage of this bill? 
To that inquiry, Senator Graham replied, "Yes." 
He also said that this was a matter to which I had referred before, and that there are 1-800 lines available. 
 I would go in to see him in the hospital in North Sydney , or drop in to see him his home .
 to in home in in . or go in Sydney I would to in his hospital North drop him the see him ,
 in would . home hospital , see to him see the drop go North to Sydney him I his in in or in
 North the , go in hospital to would see him him in . or in I see in Sydney in his drop home
One Saturday, on my way back from Sydney to Halifax, I pulled into North Sydney and went up to his home. 
 into , Sydney to North up Saturday Halifax way pulled I from . home One Sydney his went my to on back , and
 , pulled Halifax to One , went and home up Sydney on his into . Sydney I my from Saturday to North way back
 , and from into Halifax home back to Sydney I up Sydney . to his pulled Saturday on way One , North my went
 went to to and Saturday his One , up my on North Halifax Sydney , pulled home way . from into I back Sydney
 back Saturday , Sydney into went my way Sydney I to to North One his pulled from and up , home . on Halifax
 on my and Sydney . back North into Halifax home I One pulled from to Saturday , Sydney his , went way to up
 and Sydney I back Sydney into way , Halifax up One on went , home Saturday his from to pulled . North my to
 Saturday went . and , Halifax pulled my Sydney to I Sydney into home North , from One to his back on way up
 pulled my Halifax from I One into Sydney Sydney , , on up way to back . his to went Saturday and home North
 to into Saturday from way pulled Sydney home back . I his Halifax , went One my North , Sydney and on up to
 his Saturday Sydney back to into One went my , I North pulled up home from to . way , and on Sydney Halifax
 and Sydney to his home , way I up Saturday One from North . my back , pulled to Halifax Sydney on into went
 Sydney and pulled , . Halifax his to way Saturday on went up my Sydney into , from One home back I to North
 and into home , my his , to to I Sydney . Saturday One Sydney North way back Halifax on pulled up from went
 Sydney Sydney to on . up home One North I went my his back Saturday , from Halifax and , way pulled to into
 Saturday North and One Halifax went up home back Sydney , to into his on I , pulled Sydney my to way . from
It traces changes in voting eligibility, electioneering and voting practices, as well as voter turnout since Confederation. 
Extension of the vote to those who were excluded legally from the franchise, such as women, aboriginal people, religious and racial minorities, is examined in the social context of the period.  
Even though most Canadian adults were eligible to vote by 1920, there is a final chapter that looks at ways to make voting accessible to everyone, including people in all geographic locations and people with physical disabilities.  
A History of the Vote in Canada is meant to be an educational resource and a reminder to Canadians of the significance of the right to vote. 
This is in keeping with Elections Canada's 1993 mandate to educate voters about the democratic right to vote.  
While this book will appeal to historians, political scientists, university and high school teachers and students, it is hoped that it will also reach those who may have difficulty exercising their right to vote.  
As parliamentarians, honourable senators, it is our role to help promote this book and educate our fellow citizens on their rights as voters.  
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
Report of Committee 
Hon. Ron Ghitter , Chair of the Standing Senate Committee on Energy, the Environment and Natural Resources, presented the following report: 
Tuesday, December 9, 1997 
The Standing Senate Committee on Energy, the Environment and Natural Resources has the honour to present its 
SECOND REPORT 
Respectfully submitted, 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this bill be read the third time?  
On motion of Senator Butts, bill placed on the Orders of the Day for third reading at the next sitting of the Senate.  
Income Tax Conventions Implementation Act, 1997 
Report of Committee 
Hon. Michael Kirby , Chairman of the Standing Senate Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce, presented the following report: 
 One Saturday , on my way back from Sydney to Halifax , I pulled into North Sydney went up to his home .
 from pulled to I and North , Sydney went to . on his Saturday home way my into Halifax Sydney , back One
 on Sydney pulled , One way and into Sydney his from . home up to Halifax to , I my North Saturday went
 from to up One , to Halifax I Sydney way , his and pulled North my Saturday . on into back went Sydney
I knocked on the door expecting one of the girls to come to the door, but no one came. 
 knocked the to , the of no to door I come came . one door on but expecting one girls the
 come the door one to to came but I the . on , girls the door expecting of no one knocked
 knocked on expecting but come door to the one , no . door the of one I the to came girls
 door . no expecting girls one I door of the knocked but one to come the on the , to came
 came girls to on , but to one the I come door knocked expecting one the no . of the door
 to , of but . came the on the the knocked one no expecting to one door come girls door I
 the came . door one door , but to the on to knocked of come girls no expecting one I the
 the the expecting , one the girls came door . no knocked of to on door to but one I come
 door no to , come the I came one but . expecting girls on the the one of to knocked door
 come of on one but the door door no one the . knocked I , to expecting the girls to came
 one girls the no one to but knocked I to the on . come door door , came the expecting of
 expecting to girls came the I knocked one the to the , come door door but of no one on .
 the knocked to of on the one I came door one , to come the girls but . no door expecting
 door came the no the one door girls on . to one but I to of come the , expecting knocked
 I come expecting the on door door knocked of but the came one girls no , the to one to .
 of , to knocked girls the came I the . door one on but expecting to one door come no the
However, in addition to the evidence, we did refer to opinion polls that seemed to suggest a strong support for reform along these lines.  
Yes, the resolution is imperfect. 
We would like to have done it "our way," as Frank Sinatra used to say, but we must deal with the Province of Quebec in this case. 
We had to bend imperfect tools to see whether they fit our minimum requirements. 
In my view, they did not fit our minimum requirements; they fit our reasonable requirements for constitutional amendment.  
Senator Wood :
Is it not true in the letter from the bishops of Quebec - the letter the honourable senator read - that they were in favour of repealing section 93? 
They questioned linguistic rights and suggested that denominational guarantees established by 107 be maintained. 
There was a caveat there that my honourable friend forgot to read.  
Senator Grafstein :
I find myself in great difficulty defending Roman Catholic theology let alone letters from Roman Catholic archbishops. 
I will leave it to each senator to come to his or her own conclusion on the testimony and on the letters, which are appended to the report.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Honourable senators, Senator Grafstein is quite right in stating that reform is needed. 
Actually, reform is well under way in Quebec. 
The new system, it seems, will be in place for the next school year. 
New linguistic boards will be set up. 
There will be some difficulties, but, overall, it is proceeding quite well.  
What linkage is there between the new school system in Quebec and the request to exempt Quebec from certain obligations of section 93? 
I do not see any.  
 I knocked on the expecting one of the girls to come to the door , but no one came .
 the door knocked but the to girls on of the I come . no , door one one expecting to
 I door one the expecting came knocked no on the but one door , . to come of to girls
 the come expecting but . to , the knocked door I the on to one one door came of girls
Again I knocked on the door; no one came. 
 one door . knocked Again ; I no came on the
 door Again knocked the came one . on no I ;
 the ; . on knocked door Again no came I one
 on ; no the Again knocked one I door came .
 Again knocked no one on came door the ; . I
 knocked the . ; Again one door on came no I
 I door one ; the Again came on . knocked no
 no on Again . ; came the door knocked one I
 the Again one came on door knocked I no . ;
 the Again I no one on . knocked ; door came
 I . door one on ; Again came no knocked the
 one knocked door no the Again . I came ; on
 knocked ; came I no . the door Again one on
 knocked Again door ; I one on the came . no
 came on Again no door ; the one . I knocked
 came knocked the door on Again no . one I ;
Senator Pitfield was there. 
He understood that. 
This I remember.  
However flawed the 1982 Constitution was with regard to these two aspects, the special joint committee shared a defining moment. 
For the first time since 1982, two ministers from the Province of Quebec have appeared before a special joint committee of Parliament in Ottawa and have, in public hearings, given de facto and de jure recognition to the 1982 Constitution. 
Pluralism and the new demographics was the dialectic that we heard emanating from the Bloc members. 
They talked about pluralism - for the very first time. 
Surely, with patience, good ideas can have great roots and can grow great and mighty trees.  
However, members of the Reform Party, who proclaim equality across the land as a benchmark of their political theology, could not see their way fit to resolve the inequality as presented by section 93 when the opportunity presented itself.  
Honourable senators, I fully support the report and the federal resolution. 
The way ahead for the Quebec educators, parents and students will not be easy. 
Reforms in educational systems, as we have seen in Ontario in recent days, are difficult, fraught with peril and beset with misunderstanding. 
However, I cannot but be impressed with the desire of the Province of Quebec and its citizens to renovate and modernize its school system and move it forward so that the next generation of Canadian citizens, born and educated in the province of Quebec, and others, will be able more fully to participate in our modern Canadian economy.  
To paraphrase Laurier from 100 years ago, the 21st century will indeed belong to Canada.  
Hon. Therese Lavoie-Roux :
I should like to ask Senator Grafstein how he can affirm - perhaps we were not attending the same meeting - that Alliance Québec was in favour of the abolition of section 93?  
They were, as were most people, in favour of linguistic boards, but when it came to the abrogation of section 93, not only were they not in accord with that when they appeared before our committee, they even wrote to us to reconfirm their disagreement with the abrogation of section 93. 
However, Senator Grafstein has said that both the French-speaking Protestants and the English-speaking Catholics were certainly not in agreement, although they were in agreement with linguistic boards.  
It is not only the minority of the majority, in terms of the French-speaking Protestants, but also Alliance Québec that was in disagreement with this.  
I should like to raise many other points but, in view of the time, I will stop there.  
 Again I knocked on the door no one came .
 door one the knocked I came ; on Again .
 door Again I the on ; came knocked one no
 Again the came ; door . knocked no one on
I banged on the door and no one came. 
 the I came on no and door one banged .
 on the one door and I . banged no came
 and on door banged no I . came the one
 no banged I on the . door and came one
 one came banged on and no I door . the
 and one banged on . door came I no the
 on came . no one door the I banged and
 banged one and no door I came on the .
 one on . and door the no banged I came
 door one on the no I banged . came and
 no I and door the one came on banged .
 banged on the I came . no one door and
 and . no came door one the banged on I
 the one . door banged I no and on came
 the came I one on and . no door banged
 no banged came . one and on the I door
People were, shall I say, "fuddling". 
It was not their fault; it was the fault of scientists. 
The cause, they say, was social behaviour. 
That is what caused the end of this pension plan. 
It is one other social plan gone astray. 
The good old days are gone.  
We have another problem. 
People live longer. 
Again, science has interfered with a social plan. 
Retiring at age 65, dropping dead three to six years later, depending on your gender, was good for governments. 
At its inception in 1965 - payments started on January 1, 1967 - in order to be eligible for CPP benefits, you had to be 68, and 68 was about the same year that the average male died. 
It was the perfect pension plan:
Pay all your lives, and then die just as the first cheque is put into the mail. 
If there was a postal strike, the government had the benefit of both worlds - the pensioner was dead and the cheque was in the mail.  
From the beginning, the CPP was simple, but it was misnamed. 
It was misnamed because it is also a life insurance program. 
However, it is a silly program when it is part of a pension plan.  
Instead of cancelling the benefit, there is an argument made as to whether it should be means tested when cancelled or not. 
That is an area where we can save a lot of money because, as people are dying today, cheques are going out in the mail, at $3,500 a shot. 
Yet we do not have enough money to pay proper pensions when people are alive.  
 banged on the door and no one came .
 the on and came no banged . one door
 the no . door came I and one on
 on no I . banged the one came and
I got on the phone and called Bob Muir, a colleague who is now retired from this place. 
 a this retired and who Muir from place on now got , colleague Bob the called . I is phone
 Muir phone got now who is , and . from this the colleague I retired on called Bob place a
 is who and got retired called the phone . , a colleague from place this on Bob I now Muir
 is called place , the now Bob from and a on Muir phone got colleague who retired this I .
 is and a Bob on who . place I now got phone retired this from called colleague Muir the ,
 called . the now Muir from who place is retired got I a Bob on and , colleague this phone
 Muir place and who phone now . I from on colleague this got the called retired a is , Bob
 , place got phone colleague this who I is a called from the Muir on and retired . Bob now
 Bob , Muir is who from . this and now the phone retired on place called got colleague a I
 now from got Bob called phone , Muir is colleague this I the and place who a retired . on
 got from a called . Bob I colleague phone and Muir the now is retired who , place this on
 , is on I retired . a and this Bob who now phone colleague the called Muir place from got
 on Muir . I phone and a this place who , now from Bob colleague retired called is got the
 from retired called . this colleague phone now place is , got and I on the who a Bob Muir
 now got , this . on colleague I and from Muir called who place retired a phone the Bob is
 the got on and I now , retired a place colleague phone called is . Bob who from this Muir
Senator Bolduc :
When you talk about "accountability," I would suggest that that is second best. 
It is not a perfect situation, although you will have a parliamentary committee taking some responsibility. 
It is better than nothing but, in my opinion, it is second best.  
I am fairly sure that, in one way, the pure accountability we are talking about is quasi-impossible. 
Have different people manage different funds so that we will have some evaluation, some comparison and some diversification.  
Hon. Michael A. Meighen :
Honourable senators, this is precisely where I wanted clarification. 
Are you recommending that the fund be divided into four $25-billion portions and that so many firms administer each $25-billion portion in its entirety? 
Or are you recommending that one firm be responsible for one sector, such as the real estate sector and another firm be responsible for another sector?  
Senator Bolduc :
Honourable senators, in my opinion, it could be by sector, but my preference would be for the total to be broken down into four portions covering a variety of investments. 
Otherwise, if you have a block of $25 or $30 billion in real estate, you know what that means. 
Senator Meighen :
You mentioned decentralizing the decision-making process, did you not? 
Do you see any advantage to having decision-making centres such as the firm handling the $25-billion segment being located in different parts of the country?  
Senator Bolduc :
In Quebec, when the problem came up in connection with the pension plan in 1966, we insisted on having our own plan. 
I am not saying that this is how it should be across Canada; that is not my point. 
What I am saying is that, in Quebec, at the time, Jean Lesage had made it very clear that the fund was designed to provide social security. 
 I got on the and called Bob Muir , a colleague who is now retired from this place .
 got the called . is Muir place now , phone a retired this and from on I who Bob
 called on this from got place phone who colleague , Bob I now retired . Muir is a and
 a place got on now who phone . I , called Bob from is colleague retired Muir this and
I said, "Bob, has something happened to John M.?" 
 said happened has something to M John " Bob I , .?" ,
 .?" has happened , John M , I " Bob said to something
 has .?" happened , I M Bob said " John something to ,
 to I something Bob " John said happened has , , .?" M
 , I happened said Bob M John " .?" , to has something
 to , , M something I John Bob has .?" happened said "
 , Bob something said I to happened has , M " John .?"
 something M said I has happened John " to .?" Bob , ,
 .?" " happened , said Bob , M John has something I to
 " something Bob to I M , happened , John has said .?"
 , .?" happened M , I " has John to said Bob something
 happened , .?" to has said Bob John I " M , something
 , has M " I , said happened Bob something John .?" to
 something " I , to John happened M said has , .?" Bob
 I , happened Bob John said .?" , M something to " has
 , John happened said has Bob something .?" M , I to "
The Hon. the Speaker :
When shall this bill be read the second time?  
On motion of Senator Carstairs, bill placed on Orders of the Day for second reading on Thursday next, December 11, 1997.  
Bill to Amend-Second Reading-Motions in Amendment-Debate Adjourned to Await Ruling of Speaker 
On the Order: 
Resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Moore, seconded by the Honourable Senator Ferretti Barth, for the second reading of Bill C-16, An Act to amend the Criminal Code and the interpretation Act (powers to arrest and enter dwellings), 
And on the motion in amendment of the Honourable Senator Cools, seconded by the Honourable Senator Sparrow, that the motion be amended by deleting all the words after "That" and substituting the following therefor: 
"Bill C-16, An Act to amend the Criminal Code and the Interpretation Act (powers to arrest and enter dwellings), be not now read a second time because 
( a ) the Senate is opposed to the principle of a bill which has been placed before Parliament as a result of the judgment of the Supreme Court of Canada of May 22, 1997, and of the Court's Orders of June 27 and November 19, 1997; 
( b ) the Senate finds it repugnant that the Supreme Court is infringing on the sovereign rights of Parliament to enact legislation and is failing to respect the constitutional comity between the courts and Parliament; and 
( c ) the Court is in effect coercing Parliament by threatening chaotic consequences respecting law enforcement and arrests if Parliament does not pass this bill."  
Hon. Orville H. Phillips :
Honourable senators, I had adjourned the debate but I understand Senator Wood wishes to speak.  
Hon. Dalia Wood :
Honourable senators, I rise to speak in support of Senator Cools's amendment. 
The amendment, described as a reasoned amendment, is a parliamentary device which allows a member to raise concerns and opposition to the principles of a bill. 
The public's emerging concern with judicial activism, particularly in the area of criminal law, is compelling our interest and study. 
An example of this concern may be found in a December letter to The Ottawa Citizen . 
We should be mindful of these growing questions and concerns.  
I commend Senator Cools for bringing this amendment forward at this time. 
 I said , " Bob , has something happened to John M
 happened I to said " something Bob , , has .?" John
 M , said to has Bob " .?" John happened , I
 " .?" John happened , Bob something I to has , said
He replied, "No, you fool. 
 , . replied " fool you No He ,
 , fool you , replied . No He "
 No , , " fool you He replied .
 " He replied you , , . No fool
 , replied , you fool . " No He
 replied , you He . No fool , "
 replied , . He No you fool " ,
 fool you " replied He No . , ,
 you fool No . , He " , replied
 replied fool . No you " He , ,
 . " fool , you No He , replied
 He replied you " . , , fool No
 , . replied you No , fool He "
 No fool , , He . " you replied
 " replied you , , He No . fool
 replied , No . fool , you " He
Search and Rescue Helicopter Replacement Program-State of Sea King Helicopter Fleet-Government Position 
Federal-Provincial Relations 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Atlantic Provinces Equal to Increase in Social Transfers-Government Position 
Delayed Answers to Oral Questions 
Human Resources Development 
Changes to Canada Pension Plan-Accountability and Transparency of Investment Board-Undertaking to Publish Quarterly Financial Statements-Government Position 
Changes to Canada Pension Plan-Investment Board Not Subject to Access to Information Act-Government Position 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
Commemoration of Fiftieth Anniversary-Plans of Government 
Activities planned around December 10, 1997 for the launch of the 50th Anniversary commemorative year of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) 
National Defence 
Lack of Helicopter for Number of Navy Frigates-Government Position 
Forestry 
Demolition of Government Laboratories-Possibility of Restoration of Funding-Government Position 
Answers to Order Paper Questions Tabled 
Energy-Department of the Environment-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Energy-Department of Justice-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Energy-Department of Multiculturalism-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Energy-Department of Natural Resources-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Defence-Status of Clothe the Soldier Project 
 replied , " No , you fool .
 He , fool " No , replied you
 you , replied . " , fool No
 " you No . , replied fool He
Do you not know it is Saturday night? 
 is Saturday it ? you not Do night know
 ? know it not Saturday Do is you night
 ? it night not you is know Saturday Do
 it ? know not Saturday you is night Do
 know night Saturday Do you ? is not it
 not know night Saturday ? is it you Do
 Saturday is night not know it Do ? you
 Do ? know night Saturday it you not is
 it night know not Do you Saturday ? is
 ? Saturday night know it you not Do is
 not Saturday know it ? you night Do is
 know not ? Saturday night you it is Do
 not night it know Saturday you Do is ?
 ? Saturday know Do night not you is it
 know Saturday you it is Do ? not night
 Saturday know ? is night Do not it you
Were we criticized for not being able to live up to our obligations?  
Senator Graham :
Not to my knowledge. 
It is my understanding that those helicopters are at sea on exercises. 
As to precisely where they are, on whatever ocean, I cannot positively say. 
It might be a military secret, as a matter of fact.  
Federal-Provincial Relations 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Atlantic Provinces Equal to Increase in Social Transfers-Government Position 
Hon. Brenda M. Robertson :
Honourable senators, I have a supplementary that goes back to questions raised by the Honourable Senator DeWare. 
I will come back to this again tomorrow and the next day.  
I should like to know from the Leader of the Government in the Senate whether the cuts we discussed yesterday in the social transfer payments for Atlantic Canada represent the increases in the social transfers that were announced twice previously by this government? 
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
No, not that I am aware, but it is an interesting question. 
I will bring forth an answer.  
Delayed Answers to Oral Questions 
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, I have a response to a question raised in the Senate on November 25, 1997, by the Honourable Senator Oliver regarding changes to the Canada Pension Plan and the Investment Board; a response to a question raised in the Senate on November 19, 1997, by the Honourable Senator Oliver regarding the Investment Board not being subject to Access to Information; a response to a question raised in the Senate on October 23, 1997, by the Honourable Senator Kinsella regarding commemoration of the 50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights; a response to a question raised in the Senate on November 20, 1997, by the Honourable Senator Forrestall regarding the lack of helicopters for a number of navy frigates; and a response to a question raised in the Senate on November 20, 1997, by the Honourable Senator Spivak regarding the demolition of government laboratories and the possibility of a restoration of funding.  
Human Resources Development 
Changes to Canada Pension Plan-Accountability and Transparency of Investment Board-Undertaking to Publish Quarterly Financial Statements-Government Position 
 you not know it is Saturday night ?
 ? Do not know Saturday you it is
 Saturday ? you is know Do not night
 you Saturday is not night Do know ?
He has gone to church." 
 gone He has ." church to
 He ." has church to gone
 church He gone ." has to
 He to has gone ." church
 has gone church He ." to
 has church He to ." gone
 to gone He ." church has
 gone He has to church ."
 gone church to He has ."
 to He gone has church ."
 He has gone to ." church
 gone to church has He ."
 He to church has gone ."
 church ." to has gone He
 He church to ." has gone
 gone to He church has ."
Every opportunity was presented for these voices to be heard during the course of the hearings. 
We did not deny them an opportunity to be heard. 
On the other hand, we were not given an opportunity by the Reform Party to cross-examine those petitioners or to decide what weight, if any, we should give to their petition.  
I concluded, honourable senators, that the overwhelming evidence was that the majority of the minorities affected by these rights and privilege were in favour of the amendments.  
The Roman Catholic Archbishops of Quebec and the Anglican Archbishop have letters on record in which they clearly indicate they did not oppose the amendment.  
I want to read those letters into the record because they are important.  
A different situation exists in Quebec. 
Nevertheless, our assembly did not oppose the choice to amend section 93. 
It has always been our conviction that the choice of means is the responsibility of the political authorities.  
They did not oppose.  
The Anglican Archbishop, Archbishop Andrew S. Hutchison, said the following at paragraph 2 of his letter dated November 3: 
The amendments proposed to Article 93 by the Quebec government, which would remove the obligation for the Quebec government to have confessional school boards, seems reasonable to us and in keeping with traditional positions enunciated by the Anglican church.  
Honourable senators, the senior representatives of the mainstream Roman Catholic and Protestant groups did not register their opposition to these changes. 
This does not mean that this exercise was one of perfection. 
Indeed, many of us remain unhappy and regret the federal government's position taken with 23(1)( a ) then and now. 
I share, with Senator Pitfield and others, concern in that respect. 
However, unfortunately, I have a memory, and I recall very well that the 1982 Constitution, for which Senator Pitfield was a senior federal advisor, was a minimalist not a maximalist document. 
It was Senator Pitfield and others in power at the time who determined that, in order to pass the 1982 Constitution, the Province of Quebec should be given the option of proclaiming section 23(1)( a ) and that the notwithstanding clause would be incorporated in the 1982 Constitution to eviscerate the charter, both serious sources of our current distress.  
Many of us objected strenuously then, and do now, to giving the Province of Quebec these options. 
However, that is history. 
 He has to church ."
 gone to He has church
 has church to gone He
 church has to ." He
John M. was at mass. 
 at M . was . mass John
 was . mass M . at John
 was . at mass M . John
 was John mass . at . M
 at M . John . was mass
 was . mass . John M at
 at mass John M . was .
 mass at M was John . .
 was John at . mass . M
 . at was John . mass M
 M John . . at mass was
 mass was at . M . John
 . was mass at John . M
 . . was John mass at M
 John . mass was . at M
 . John M was at mass .
That is unfair. 
They are not without some type of relief and I will address that later.  
However, this is an issue of linguistic rights. 
Here the question is not of linguistic rights but denominational privileges.  
In cross-examining Alliance Quebec, it was clear that they did not oppose the amendments to section 93 but rather the enforcement of section 23(1)( a ). Section 23(1)( a ) requires a proclamation by the Province of Quebec, and a declaration of this proclamation is, of course, not within federal powers. 
We gave that up in 1982.  
Senator Pitfield knows this well. 
He was an architect of the Constitution Act, 1982. 
It is clearly within the four corners of the assembly of Quebec to proclaim, if it chooses, section 23(1)( a ). Many of us are unhappy with this aspect of section 23(1)( a ). Students in over 13,000 families have been precluded from entering the English stream because the Province of Quebec has refused to proclaim section 23(1)( a ). 
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Who put it in?  
Senator Grafstein :
Rather, they wished to use this opportunity to leverage the Government of Quebec to proclaim section 23(1)( a ). This the Quebec government was clearly not prepared to do.  
The second group, the aboriginal groups within Quebec, claimed that this resolution detrimentally affected their rights. 
The report makes clear - and we came to this conclusion aided and abetted by legal advice and statements by both Quebec and federal ministers - that aboriginal rights were in no way, shape or form, affected by this resolution. 
We said so in the report.  
This left two groups, small but important, who claim to be detrimentally affected. 
It was not clear that the entirety of these two groups were objecting. 
These are the two groups to which Senator Bolduc referred.  
There were certain spokespersons representing these groups. 
 M . was at mass .
 . mass M at . John
 mass at . John . was
 mass at . . was John
He was a deeply religious man. 
 religious man a deeply He . was
 was deeply man He a religious .
 man . was a religious deeply He
 . deeply religious a was man He
 was deeply He religious . man a
 was . He religious deeply man a
 man . religious He was deeply a
 . deeply man a He was religious
 . He a was deeply religious man
 deeply . He religious man was a
 a was He . man religious deeply
 a . man He religious deeply was
 He religious . a deeply was man
 was deeply He religious a man .
 He deeply was man religious . a
 a He deeply was religious . man
The federation's value lies in this country's historic respect for the individuality of minorities and for their desire not to have this individuality crushed by the numerical weight of the majority.  
What we are being asked to do in the final analysis is remove constitutionally guaranteed rights, as discriminatory as they may be by today's standards, and entrust them to a province which will honour them for a given period, with no guarantee that they will be incorporated on a permanent basis. 
The National Assembly has endorsed this unanimously, as did most witnesses who stayed with the issue, with varying degrees of enthusiasm. 
Prominent legal experts even argued that various Supreme Court decisions have interpreted section 93 in such a way that it has lost much of its significance.  
All this may be true, but there are still Quebecers who feel that by adopting the resolution they will be abandoned by the very Parliament whose responsibility it is to protect them.  
I wish to end my remarks by quoting from an opinion which was given to the Quebec government by what is known as the Catholic Committee of the Education Council of the province of Quebec, a consultative body which is asked to give its views on issues affecting the Catholic religion in schools. 
This opinion was written and delivered following the hearings of the joint committee. 
It is very pertinent that we are all aware of them.  
I wish to quote from four paragraphs, and I am not quoting them out of context, as the sentiment in the four paragraphs I will quote reflect the tone of the entire paper. 
The implications of the constitutional amendment requested by the Quebec government are not easy to interpret or measure accurately. 
Concerns and objections have been expressed, particularly by the English Catholic and French Protestant minorities. 
Experts in constitutional law have said that the amendment could have a surprising impact, far beyond the limited effects usually referred to in the media. 
The public may have trouble grasping the real scope of what is happening or making its views known because it does not have access to the necessary information and means of communication. 
It must therefore be acknowledged that if Parliament grants the request, public support for the amendment is less certain than support for the creation of linguistic school boards....  
Bill 109 - 
- which is the Quebec Education Act passed in June - 
- upholds the principle of freedom of choice in schooling. 
However, the debates of the Joint Committee of the House of Commons and Senate highlighted the fact that the legislation in this area will be jeopardized the moment Quebec is excluded from the application of subsections 1 to 4 of section 93. 
The Committee therefore believes that the amendment could turn out to be something of a time bomb unless the Quebec government is prepared to renew the notwithstanding clauses or look for a better alternative that would allow it to retain in practical terms its authority to enact legislation on denominational schools....  
Finally: 
 He was a religious man .
 . religious He deeply was man
 He man deeply a religious .
 man a deeply He religious .
When I next dropped in to see him, he was in the hospital, and he told me that I should have known that he was in church because it was Saturday and he had to be in church by five o'clock.  
 five in I hospital have see church by had I clock and and to to he was , o dropped him me be told the he Saturday next that . When because known ' in was in should church he was that it in , he
 by should was he that in five have the o Saturday him , church was and see he in next . was to told me he dropped ' and , he When be church I to hospital clock in had I in that it because known
 in When in was me clock Saturday he o and he have should to hospital it told , church I ' in because . church dropped by , had and I he to be him in that see was he next five the known that was
 , he because to was the that in me clock it told church and see and by I was be next o was him in five in he When known church dropped , I he to in have . hospital he had should Saturday that '
 in was in clock church ' he to him known church was was he I in . When hospital it and , he he I by told , to next see be should five that me the dropped had o have and in because Saturday that
 dropped , and that me see Saturday in be hospital have the in When , in he because to I told five o church . should clock was he was next church that to it he I known had in and by he him ' was
 he dropped I he see by me should church Saturday he was , . the known in that ' to to that When o him and was was and had clock have in , church next be because it told five in in I he hospital
 to next clock see , him be . and was , he was I by Saturday me When that dropped he told I was he it hospital he known the that should to church in because in and church have five ' had o in in
 that was church , in in I had he me hospital . was to in in see ' When that Saturday by clock he was him the should it next be , known and dropped o and told to he have he five church I because
 should was told that because , that he ' Saturday he in When be see in him in in to was church and . have to o dropped hospital the next known and clock he five church I I me was it by , he had
 the by next o in clock that told church ' was in because Saturday me in When , he was in he have had I and be . known I was he to should five to see hospital he that dropped , and him church it
 in and I he five . see clock to that should had the known and he , , dropped was in I in When by have he ' to me told him o that hospital Saturday church because in next he was be church it was
 had . that him to see to five was was the hospital by church , in was I he be clock he in in he me and in should Saturday he known told church o , ' and have that next because dropped it I When
 , and him that he church and should me , it to . that ' I he five was Saturday was known had hospital in I church to When because he was be in in dropped told see o the he next have in by clock
 five that , see in in in I , was and him to church I he should be he had next o the told was to was he that me clock ' Saturday church in it known dropped When by he . hospital and have because
 had that be the was in to me ' have should . was by in he hospital clock known in o him When was he dropped because he church he that next in it Saturday I told , and and I five see , to church
However, I wanted to make this correction, because you referred to the "government in place", when in fact it was the Liberal government of the day that made the decision, over the objections of the Parti Québécois then in opposition.  
I am asking you the same question I asked Senator Grafstein, but to which I did not get an answer. 
Why is it so important to exempt Quebec from section 93 to allow it to reform its school system? 
What is the connection between the two?  
Senator Robichaud :
Let me give you my version of the facts. 
When we heard witnesses from Quebec, including school board officials, parents and teachers, some of them told us that, in its present form, section 93 brings about a superimposition of structures, particularly in the Montreal region. 
These people told us that this was preventing authorities from providing the best possible services. 
These people also told us they wanted the resolution to be passed before the end of the year so they could start long-term planning. 
They would really appreciate having some time to implement these changes.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
I do not want to unduly prolong the debate, but I have another question for Senator Robichaud. 
Since we did not get answers to certain questions, would you agree to invite the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs, who is the sponsor of this resolution, to appear before the Senate in committee of the whole? 
We would like him to give us certain assurances before we make a decision on this issue?  
Senator Robichaud :
Honourable senators, the minister who is the sponsor of the resolution has already appeared before the joint committee. 
He came at the beginning and at the end of the hearings, and my honourable colleague was there to ask him questions on the issues that were of concern to him.  
If the honourable senator did not get answers to all his questions, that is an entirely different matter. 
On motion of Senator Kinsella, for Senator Simard, debate adjourned.  
Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration 
 When I next dropped in to see him , he was in the hospital , and he told me that I should have known that he was in church because it was Saturday and had to be in church by five o ' clock .
 told in was him and next in should he by known he . to and I , was I he be church ' church dropped that have that in the had it , o was he see clock hospital Saturday in five When to because
 had I the see be o , that in to him dropped he that When by he in should he was to and because have church Saturday , in . it told and was clock I known next ' was five hospital me he in
 I it he When Saturday by that was he . o that hospital dropped him should I in to be had me and church told clock church he have in five next was see and was to known he the in , , because in
John M. will be known as a person who had his priorities right. 
 as right person will . known his . John priorities who M be a had
 . person . his a be known M right will priorities John who had as
 . John who right will person known his priorities as a M be had .
 had . who M his will right person . known priorities as John be a
 will priorities . be known a M John as right who . his had person
 who M right his be will . as had a John priorities . person known
 known be a John his person . . had will M right priorities who as
 priorities be . person M had who right a known John his . will as
 had will John his . who a known person be as . M priorities right
 priorities be had right known M will as . person John his a who .
 who his will be right . known priorities M a . had John as person
 known right had person . priorities M John as who his . a will be
 M as a . be priorities . known will right person had John who his
 right person M will had a who . be . as his priorities John known
 a person will . right known be as M . had who John his priorities
 person who had . his known a right be . as priorities M John will
We have spent all this cash over the last 30 years and we say now, "Oh, it is not our fault. 
It is not legislators' fault. 
Senator Gigantès :
Are you quoting the Reform Party?  
Senator Tkachuk :
I do not think so, although I have a few things to say about Reform here too, which I will get to right away.  
I would like to quote Preston Manning's comments from Tuesday, October 28, in committee. 
These are the other guys in the other place. 
He was speaking of Martin and Pettigrew.  
The alternative we would like the committee to consider rests on four pillars rather than three: the seniors benefit, which is targeted to lower-income people; a smaller, more focused CPP, not a scrapped CPP; 
There is the big change from the last election.  
...an expanded RRSP program; and tax relief to seniors. 
We will argue that our four-pillar plan delivers more retirement income per dollar invested than this three-pillar plan the government is putting forward.  
I think I have explained some of the ideas we got from the government side. 
The liability of $600 billion becomes unfunded if we all quit paying CPP premiums, but the obligations still have to be met. 
That is what Reform was proposing through the election campaign and over the previous four years. 
They have changed. 
Now they want a smaller CPP.  
However, Preston Manning could never explain the first program. 
Now they have a CPP program which they wanted to explain to the minister in committee. 
 John M . will be known as a person had his priorities right .
 his priorities who will be . as known right John had person M .
 person priorities . right known had John be a who M will . his
 person a who . John be priorities will . right M as had known
He was a family man. 
 man a was He family .
 family He was . man a
 . He family a man was
 family a . man was He
 a family was . man He
 He man . a was family
 family a was . He man
 He was family . a man
 a man was family He .
 was . man family a He
 a family man was He .
 . man was a He family
 family . He a was man
 family man . was He a
 He was . family man a
 man was family a He .
What will happen if this plan goes through is that the people in this country who really need it will get it. 
They have to travel 240 kilometres to the closest bank. 
Many do not speak English. 
What would you do in this case for these people who have nothing?  
Some Hon. Senators :
Hear, hear!  
Senator Stratton :
I thank the honourable senator for her question. 
It was an excellent question, and it is one that she should ask of the government. 
She should ask the government what they are doing to communicate the changes to our pension plan system as a whole.  
Senator Chalifoux :
I am asking you.  
Senator Stratton :
First, because of the $600-billion debt that the pension plan has, I do not think that we can privatize it at this time. 
I do not think the people the honourable senator talked about, and the people of my generation, are prepared enough financially to make that transition. 
You cannot do that immediately. 
One needs only consider the situation of Chile. 
Chile is a long, skinny country on the west coast of South America, and I really do believe they have a communications problem there as severe as ours. 
I told honourable senators the story of the finance minister in Chile, going on television every three weeks to a month, and breaking down the new plan into segments, talking to the people, because they all have television, and communicating in that fashion. 
That was the government's way of dealing with it in Chile. 
 He was family man .
 was man . a He
 was family a man He
 He . family man was
His brothers and sisters and his niece and nephew meant so much to him throughout his life, as did his other priorities: his church, his Cape Breton, his party and, of course, whatever he was doing at any time for people. 
 much and people : party his doing niece Breton other , so as , any , and at and his time priorities was His did and sisters throughout he of course life Cape nephew for his to his , meant his . his , whatever church him brothers
 as people , : throughout his doing Cape , priorities him meant church , to time nephew and much His and niece whatever any his was of . for so brothers course life his his other at sisters he , and and party his his did , Breton
 whatever for and , party was meant and of as . , sisters so and other his , at His : priorities and , his any his time throughout doing course brothers people his his Cape he niece did nephew life , Breton his to church much him
 Breton niece , time people , for doing was , , his at his and nephew brothers meant His much his any of : he as and party him , course other throughout his his priorities and sisters Cape did his whatever church so . life to and
 and doing His time him of his party life nephew and was for : any did and Breton his to whatever other sisters much church , . his his at his course meant , priorities his people throughout as , and , brothers so he Cape niece ,
 for he did course of much was priorities as people and so and church party : and , Breton his any , his life meant his Cape throughout to other time his nephew . and , , brothers niece , doing his his His at sisters whatever him
 life , throughout did to and so time church of as whatever sisters at priorities his doing his His and for , much was and Breton . him niece course people brothers any meant his he his , Cape and , , : nephew his his party other
 him at his brothers Breton of did his His priorities and he whatever throughout course as any nephew so much niece time his party meant his sisters life : to , other , and for was and , . , his church doing , his Cape and people
 doing throughout time much people , church , meant and Cape his so his his life other any his him as Breton niece nephew priorities to sisters and did he of , and whatever , course at his . : his , party was and for brothers His
 , and and of party people his , : he at meant church his him for and much life whatever , sisters his doing and brothers his as time , other his , priorities to Breton niece did any throughout so Cape His his nephew course was .
 so His was party at , he his life , meant , his doing did other his priorities throughout sisters nephew people for . , and and whatever him course time his brothers his Breton and Cape to , and his as any church : niece much of
 throughout of Cape time . he so his , for meant whatever people him : , to course nephew Breton and , priorities life brothers his was , as church sisters did at his any his niece party doing His his other and his much , and and
 and , his sisters . and his to doing meant his time throughout so and nephew at brothers other course , was for whatever , church his any priorities , he of and , much Breton party Cape him : life did his niece people as His his
 other church much his niece throughout to , doing life Cape meant , and and party brothers priorities any his his as his his people whatever him he , so for of did was at : and his Breton time and , His , sisters nephew course .
 so , as nephew his his and , doing meant people and whatever was niece his Breton priorities course at his his throughout . Cape and he , of did party sisters him much to : brothers time any His church his , life for and , other
 doing people as at so other meant his whatever throughout party , his Breton him and his his any , did , course was nephew to brothers much , for his . of and life niece church sisters : and Cape priorities he His , his time and
Honourable senators, I rise today on behalf of a colleague who cannot be present, Senator Paul Lucier. 
Senator Lucier has sent me a fax which he has asked me to communicate to the chamber. 
For your benefit, he wants me to reply to the comments made about him in the media recently.  
He writes: 
I would like to make some points with respect to this matter: 
The Citizen said: "Paul Lucier said the Senate's legal staff approved his change in residency five years ago when he moved to Vancouver."  
Senator Lucier says: 
This is not true. 
I never spoke with legal staff five years ago about this. 
I never had any problem about residency.  
2. The Citizen said: "He said Senate staff told him he could keep his seat as long as he continues to own property in the Yukon."  
Senator Lucier replies: 
Again, I never spoke to the staff and was therefore never told any such comment. 
On my attendance, 21 % (19 out of 87 sittings), and on the statement: "He says - 
Senator Lucier has underlined the word "says."  
- he has bone cancer and must live in the British Columbia city for treatments".  
Senator Lucier replies: 
I wonder if Jack Aubry is questioning the fact that I have cancer. 
I would gladly give him permission to question my doctor as to whether I have had cancer for 10 years.  
4. I would like to have these points clarified but not in the media. 
 His brothers and sisters and his niece and nephew meant so much to him throughout his life , as did his other priorities : his church , his Breton , his party and , of course , whatever he was doing at any time for people .
 he his him party and any His course so his , and , to at much meant people his and time whatever : Breton . did throughout as for of was nephew doing sisters his church priorities other his , brothers Cape his and life , ,
 course meant sisters Breton : and for and his he and his to at of party was Cape any so and much His his his people nephew , priorities whatever his his niece other , did life him , throughout brothers , church time as . ,
 , course for sisters brothers his time church . and to his at niece and as his throughout him any of did and his his life His he doing priorities , Breton whatever : and , so Cape nephew party , meant was his other , people
He was a real people person, an educator, a lawyer, a veteran, and a member of the legion.  
 legion He a , , a lawyer veteran and of educator a people , an a member the was . person real ,
 a veteran was a educator a a an , , real and , people lawyer of the , He legion . member person
 people person lawyer legion , was veteran , the and , a educator of real a . member a an He a ,
 He person , a real an and lawyer educator member was , a , a of the people legion , . veteran a
 the people , , of a person a lawyer . was member He , a veteran and , real educator legion an a
 member , , a people lawyer and . a was the a legion educator veteran an , person a real , He of
 legion a a a , He member people , was veteran of the . lawyer a , person , real and an educator
 people , veteran . a real the and , member person He of legion a , lawyer a , was educator a an
 veteran a educator member . real of the a a a , , was He person legion , and , people lawyer an
 of legion a , person an . lawyer member veteran educator real , people the a He and a , a was ,
 real a a member veteran . an a and was the a legion educator lawyer people , person , He , , of
 , a an people a the a real veteran , educator legion lawyer member , , . person a was He of and
 , a an , He the a a of lawyer . and was person a educator real people , , legion veteran member
 He lawyer the , veteran an , real a . of a a person and educator legion people member , was a ,
 a , , and , a an member the a veteran , . legion He people person educator a of was real lawyer
 a person , an lawyer member and , a the , real legion educator a veteran , of He was a . people
Senator Gigantès :
And the tedium?  
That is what we need to tell them at Christmas when we go home; not that we passed the bill.  
Hon. Roch Bolduc :
Honourable senators, I will not go back over the very important points raised by my colleague with respect to the intergenerational inequity in this bill. 
I would like to look at other aspects of the problem.  
Honourable senators, the government is proposing to amend the CPP. 
I would have found it appropriate to examine all the major aspects of the plan at this time. 
This has been done for some important facets such as its survival, its management and its performance. 
I will address these shortly.  
This strikes me as an important question. 
Why, for instance, if I do not wish to contribute and prefer to look after my own financial security, should I be obliged by law to participate in the plan, even if I am prepared to sign a document absolving the government of all responsibility on my account? 
Why must everyone belong to a plan whose money will be invested by others, by public servants?  
The government's response to this fundamental question is obligatory collectivization. 
The government seems to assume that Canadians are irresponsible, ignorant, and improvident, and that big brother in Ottawa knows best.  
If he is so competent, what has this big brother been doing for 20 years? 
He agreed to give pension benefits to people, but forgot to levy what he needed to be able to do so, and what he levied, he loaned to the provinces at such low rates that, unless there are drastic changes, the plan will go bankrupt.  
Here we have a classic case of public mismanagement. 
On the one hand, they hand out goodies and, on the other, they forget to charge for them. 
And now they have learned nothing from this sad tale:
 He was a real people person , an educator , a lawyer , a veteran , a member of the legion .
 , a people person legion lawyer an the a and was veteran of , member . , a He real educator a
 of people member legion veteran educator He an and a a the , , a . was person lawyer , , a
 member , educator a a legion was an of . a and person real people the He veteran a lawyer , ,
He was extremely proud of the Royal Canadian Legion. 
 . Legion of extremely Royal Canadian the was proud He
 proud Legion the of Canadian extremely Royal He was .
 extremely of Legion He proud Royal was . the Canadian
 Canadian Royal was Legion proud He . extremely the of
 proud He was of Legion . extremely the Canadian Royal
 Legion Royal . He proud the was Canadian extremely of
 extremely of proud Royal Legion was . He the Canadian
 Royal of He . the proud was Legion Canadian extremely
 was Legion Canadian Royal . the extremely proud He of
 Legion Canadian of . proud Royal extremely was He the
 Legion the He was Canadian extremely proud . Royal of
 He Royal extremely proud the Legion of was . Canadian
 . Legion proud extremely of was the Royal Canadian He
 of Canadian . Royal He Legion the proud was extremely
 extremely . the He Canadian of was proud Royal Legion
 extremely Legion Royal of the He . was Canadian proud
It was imposed on Bill C-110 which proposed certain constitutional amendments; on Bill C-12 which dealt with employment insurance; and on the committee report on Term 17. 
It is becoming a habit; a habit that is hard to break.  
Bill C-2 is just another in a series of bad bills, incompetent work and dictatorial action. 
It was introduced last week in the Senate, preceded by time allocation in the other place. 
With passage of this bill, the government will be imposing the largest tax grab in the history of the country. 
Canadians are unaware of what is happening, in particular our young people who will be the most affected and the most mistreated. 
We owe it to them, our grandchildren and our children, to study this legislation thoroughly and to amend it, because it is not their fault that this program has been so badly managed. 
They will have little chance of collecting under the CPP, hence the changes the government intends to make.  
We are simply shovelling our hard-earned money into the greedy hands of Paul Martin, Minister of Finance, who wants to be the man who slays the deficit dragon, and we know how he intends to do it. 
He has followed three policy themes to accomplish that end.  
First, he has transferred much of the tax burden to the provinces, forcing what I call "downloaded increased taxes." 
Provincial and municipal governments, who were receiving less money, had to increase taxes. 
The government transferred debt.  
Second, this government has taken advantage of the low interest rates which resulted from the efforts of the Conservative government over eight years to bring the deficit and inflation under control and to bring interest rates down.  
Third, Paul Martin then not only raised licence fees and taxes, he used the accumulated surplus in the EI fund to pay down the deficit. 
It is this third policy theme with which we, on this side, feel most uncomfortable. 
He used the surplus in the EI fund, not to extend benefits, not to reduce premiums - which is normally what is done in a payroll deduction - but to cut benefits for a totally separate policy objective. 
He used this payroll tax purely and simply, to achieve his policy goal of cutting the deficit.  
That is why the Auditor General is prohibited from examining the fund unless the directors of the fund agree. 
It should not be for the directors to agree or disagree. 
 He was extremely proud of the Canadian Legion .
 of the Royal was Legion proud Canadian He extremely
 Canadian . the proud was extremely of He Legion
 proud . He was Royal the of extremely Legion
The Legion at North Sydney honoured him. 
 . honoured at The Sydney Legion North him
 Legion The North him Sydney . honoured at
 at . The Legion him honoured North Sydney
 The honoured him North at . Legion Sydney
 him The Legion honoured at Sydney . North
 him honoured Legion Sydney at The North .
 him Legion at Sydney . The honoured North
 Legion The honoured North at Sydney . him
 The him . Sydney at North honoured Legion
 honoured Sydney Legion him at The . North
 North The honoured at . him Sydney Legion
 North . The Sydney honoured him at Legion
 . North him Legion The at Sydney honoured
 honoured The him . Sydney North at Legion
 him Sydney North honoured . The at Legion
 Legion . The Sydney at him honoured North
It is equally clear that there was an overwhelming consensus with few dissents throughout every segment of Quebec for renovating the Quebec school system into two linguistic streams, two linguistic boards, English and French. 
There is no question whatsoever in my mind, based on the evidence that I heard.  
Now we come to the more difficult question confronting members of the committee - to determine if there was a "majority" of the so-called "minorities" affected or given these denominational privileges.  
Even here, we had difficulty in definition. 
Notwithstanding that, we still treated that majority as if it were a minority.  
I will not repeat Senator Stewart's questions yesterday about section 93 and its limited scope, but I commend all students of the Constitution to examine section 93 and see how even the subsections of section 93, in so far as that section pertains to the province of Quebec, are much narrower in its scope than is clearly understood or debated in this Senate chamber. 
I will not go into that aspect of this debate. 
It would take half an hour, but I would be pleased to do so privately with any senator who is interested.  
The evidence we heard was extensive, definitive and clear. 
Let me quickly review the committee's evidence that brought it to conclude that there was a strong majority of the so-called minorities affected.  
We had a unanimous resolution in the National Assembly of Quebec, both parties, with two abstentions. 
The efforts made by the Quebec ministers seem to assure that a strong consensus had been obtained.  
We heard direct evidence from 68 groups composed of over 100 individual witnesses. 
Notwithstanding the short time-frames allotted in our terms of reference and as referenced by Senator Lynch-Staunton, the committee clearly heard every viewpoint that people wished to express.  
I hear Senator Wood. 
I will deal with her concerns in a moment.  
While some individual groups did not give evidence, as pointed out by Senator Wood, I concluded that, having examined the materials from those groups, that their viewpoint was indeed expressed by others during the course of those hearings. 
I believe no viewpoint was excluded from our deliberations.  
The time frames in the hearings in no way diminished the committee's ability to obtain or weigh the evidence. 
The committee made a thorough investigation of that evidence. 
 The at North Sydney honoured him .
 . him Legion North at The Sydney
 honoured The Legion him . Sydney at
 North Sydney him Legion at honoured The
It was a wonderful night. 
 It a night wonderful . was
 was wonderful . It a night
 . night a It was wonderful
 . wonderful night a It was
 a . night was wonderful It
 . night was It wonderful a
 was It wonderful . a night
 a . wonderful was It night
 a It . wonderful night was
 wonderful It a . was night
 wonderful was night a . It
 wonderful It was . a night
 . night a It was wonderful
 wonderful was night . It a
 wonderful night was . a It
 wonderful . was It night a
Will the government consider the way it calculates transfer payments to ensure that cash transfers to Atlantic Canada, Saskatchewan and Manitoba do not decline any further?  
Senator Graham :
I shall certainly bring those very legitimate concerns to the attention of the responsible minister.  
Environment 
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Support by Provinces of Government Position taken at Kyoto-Request for Particulars 
Hon. Mira Spivak :
Honourable senators, on December 1, the federal government proposed that Canada's position at the Kyoto meeting on global climate change would be that developed countries should target 2010 emissions that are 3 per cent below 1990 levels and that Canada should reach the 1990 levels by 2007.  
Given the consultation process preceding Kyoto, could the Leader of the Government tell us which provinces and territories support the position that the federal government is currently advancing in Kyoto, and could he also tell us which ones do not support this position?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, if I were in Kyoto I would be able to offer Senator Spivak a more definitive answer. 
I know that the Province of Alberta is well represented in Kyoto, as the Honourable Senator Ghitter has alluded to in the past.  
I do not know the positions of the individual provinces. 
Certainly there was an enormous amount of consultation at meetings in various parts of the country prior to the Kyoto conference.  
The meetings of officials have proceeded for several days. 
I understand that meetings of ministers got under way yesterday or the day before and are continuing until tomorrow.  
The Canadian delegation is in the midst of negotiations and is considering the best approach for all of Canada. 
In that context, I am sure all of those present from the provinces are being consulted. 
The negotiations are in a state of flux at the present time and it might be premature for me to speculate on what the outcome might be.  
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Target Year for Implementation of Government Position taken at Kyoto-Government Position 
Hon. Mira Spivak :
 It a wonderful night .
 was . wonderful a night
 wonderful was . a It
 night wonderful was It .
You could feel the love for John M. in the Legion hall that night during the dinner on the occasion of his eighty-fifth birthday. 
 M . for birthday fifth of during love his dinner the Legion night feel hall the in You on - . occasion eighty John the that could the
 could on occasion M the Legion night the for the of that eighty . . John hall the birthday feel love You in during fifth - his dinner
 the birthday that of could . hall . the occasion M feel fifth night John during his for dinner eighty - the the You love Legion in on
 . - in Legion feel on love night the the dinner his You fifth for that the . eighty occasion hall the birthday M could during John of
 the night on hall fifth the . birthday love - that You the occasion his for of feel Legion . John in M eighty dinner during the could
 the John night the during his the that could dinner - hall love occasion You of M . in Legion fifth eighty birthday feel the for on .
 . fifth the eighty of occasion that You love the - John feel on his Legion . in night the birthday could the hall dinner during M for
 - fifth the dinner night birthday . the in love for could Legion the on eighty M You of feel that John the occasion during . his hall
 the - during dinner John could . birthday occasion M hall eighty fifth night the in his You the love for Legion of that the . on feel
 night . for John that in of feel - fifth Legion the dinner his love the hall on . the birthday could M eighty You the occasion during
 occasion . You M dinner the John his during the on birthday eighty could . of in that night the Legion hall - for the feel love fifth
 that the the M of could during hall birthday night - his on love fifth for John dinner eighty the . the occasion You feel Legion . in
 dinner . fifth on that love John his You during night the Legion for hall eighty birthday in . - M the occasion the could of the feel
 M occasion - could his of the the the during . John feel night that . for dinner You hall birthday Legion on the eighty fifth in love
 feel fifth eighty could Legion that John - the . birthday during the on the You dinner hall love occasion night . in the of M for his
 during his the the hall Legion M on occasion - . John You fifth the dinner night . for feel the could in that birthday love of eighty
This agency will have more or less the same powers as the Caisse de dépôt du Québec. 
The management of these funds will therefore be given to a government monopoly, as was done with the generation and distribution of electricity.  
However, how can the performance of a monopoly be assessed? 
And do you know of any monopoly where unacceptable mismanagement did not occur at one time or another? 
There is a long list of unfortunate cases of poor management - we have all heard stories of the extravagant expense accounts of people in the public sector who think they own the jobs they are holding - of bad investments, such as those made in real estate by an agency like the one we are creating, for example, of consumer gouging - we have seen monopolies charge excessive rates, because they were the only ones providing the service - of unreasonable benefits, such as complete job security for employees at the expense of the taxpayer - as has occurred in crown corporations you are familiar with - of differences in economic and social objectives - this also happened when an agency was created and given a mandate, and then after 15 years, it started doing something else, we have all seen this - of conflicts of interest involving officials who make no difference between their personal interest and that of the public, et cetera.  
There is a long list of horror stories involving monopolies. 
The whole history of the public sector, here and elsewhere, is full of such unfortunate incidents. 
I will not speak here about what occurred in Eastern Europe or in the Communist Bloc. 
But in this country and in countries like France and England, such cases have been a constant feature of the past 15 or 20 years.  
You may tell me that such things also happen in the private sector. 
Of course, but in this case it is everybody's money that is at stake, and not just private funds.  
That is why careful consideration must be given to this proposal for a new government structure. 
I am referring to the Investment Board.  
All the contributions will be invested by this so-called Investment Board. 
I would like to start by saying that in 10 years, we will have a government agency managing some $150 billion.  
Do you realize how much power these people will have? 
Every week, every Monday morning when these people arrive at work, they will find in front of them millions and millions of dollars that they will have to invest immediately. 
Three billion dollars is $3,000 million. 
Theoretically, this is $600 million a day. 
This has to be invested right away, it cannot wait until the afternoon.  
 You could feel the love for John M . in the Legion that night during the dinner on the occasion of his eighty - fifth birthday .
 of . M - love that night the feel John his during fifth hall dinner in could birthday on eighty for the the the . You occasion
 the - . Legion during feel . eighty on for You of John could the the night that his love the in occasion hall dinner birthday M
 dinner could the the Legion the of hall feel M John birthday that occasion eighty the night fifth his . for love on . - during in
I was invited to speak on that occasion. 
 speak invited that was to I occasion . on
 on speak I that invited was to occasion .
 that invited I occasion to on was . speak
 speak . occasion on I to that invited was
 I speak to on invited was occasion that .
 occasion I to . that was speak on invited
 on . I to that invited speak occasion was
 occasion was on . to invited speak I that
 was that speak to occasion on . invited I
 invited . I was speak on occasion that to
 occasion . that I was to speak invited on
 speak on that to occasion was invited . I
 that I on invited to . occasion speak was
 I to on invited occasion speak that was .
 speak to that occasion I . was on invited
 speak invited . that to on was occasion I
There is a word in law for something from which one cannot extricate oneself, and where a decision must be made. 
That is why they have an agreement today. 
We tried to get it done in 1986.  
Senator Gigantès :
And you failed. 
You could not do it.  
Senator Tkachuk :
Because the Liberals would not agree. 
I will defend my government, and my honourable friend will defend his.  
I will not delve too far into the OAS because there are other speakers who wish to deal with this issue over the next two weeks. 
Perhaps we, as senators, will be able to discuss this matter well into the new year, which I hope we do.  
Senator Gigantès :
You are reading from the wrong script.  
Senator Taylor :
It is obvious that my honourable friend does not have any notes.  
Senator Tkachuk :
I think I am getting to honourable senators opposite.  
I was told by the Honourable Senator Kirby that members opposite would only have one speaker on this issue. 
I have a feeling that we may hear from a few more senators after I and other senators point out some of the weaknesses in Bill C-2.  
Honourable senators, I would reiterate that this is not a pension program: this is a payroll tax! 
 I was invited to speak on that .
 that on speak I . to invited occasion
 . invited to was speak occasion I that
 was I on . speak to that occasion
You could feel the love, admiration and respect for that man on any such occasion.  
 any You occasion for and respect feel on such man . admiration that love the , could
 any could occasion the love for on that You respect , and such man admiration . feel
 the respect could admiration occasion man such love . any and feel for on that You ,
 any man and on feel could for You such that occasion the love respect . admiration ,
 feel admiration . that , man love could for such You respect on any occasion the and
 that for could on admiration love You any occasion respect , man feel such and . the
 such for . You that , the any occasion feel admiration and on man respect could love
 occasion the . You for man feel love , admiration such any respect and that on could
 for admiration any on . love respect , the that and man occasion feel such You could
 love the feel for man that could admiration respect , and . such You occasion any on
 man the and You admiration love . occasion could that feel any respect on for such ,
 love that You and feel on man such any the for could . occasion respect admiration ,
 occasion any the love admiration man , respect and You such that feel on could . for
 You . , the admiration such man that any could and respect on love for occasion feel
 respect . man the love any on could , You such feel admiration occasion that for and
 respect feel such , could that admiration You and occasion love . the for man on any
It is the typical Reform program we have come to expect. 
They are off in left field somewhere, although I do not think they would want to be described that way.  
Now they want to create a super-RRSP, which does not make any sense because, not only is it at odds with what they said in committee and what they said in the election campaign, it does not fit into their tax plan. 
Remember, they have a tax plan with a flat tax. 
With the flat tax, you reduce the amount of exemptions. 
We are not getting any ideas from them.  
Now I will turn to the Liberals.  
Senator Gigantès :
Be careful.  
Senator Tkachuk :
Since taking office, they have taken $300 million in new taxes from senior citizens by income-testing the age credit. 
They want Canadians to mature their RRSPs by the year they turn 69 rather than the previous age limit of 71. 
However, seniors do not know about it, and this will be another huge tax grab - Merry Christmas, Canada - by the Liberal Government and Paul Martin. 
Twice they have killed plans to increase the RRSP contribution limits so that people could put money away for their future given that the government will not provide for them.  
The Canadian Association of Retired Persons says that as many as 80,000 Canadians may fail to convert their RRSPs on time. 
Where are the big advertising programs of the Government of Canada which they mount when they really want to advertise something? 
This is a government program they do not want to advertise. 
They want it to slip in, just like this bill, so that people will not know and will not make the proper financial decisions, but instead will be exposed to a huge tax load for the year 1997. 
That is what Paul Martin wants, so that in February he can brag in his budget speech about how he has cleaned up the deficit - on the backs of the unemployed, on the backs of senior citizens, and on the backs of young people who will be paying the $400 million to the new pension plan.  
Senator Gigantès :
 You could feel the love , admiration and respect for that man on any such .
 on that You the feel such admiration for man love any . and respect could ,
 man the occasion feel . for any You respect , admiration such and on that could
 occasion on and feel , any the respect admiration You such man . that could love
We will miss him. 
 him . will miss We
 will . miss him We
 him . miss We will
 miss . will We him
 miss will . We him
 miss will We . him
 We miss will him .
 . will him We miss
 We miss . will him
 . We him miss will
 We will miss him .
 We miss . him will
 miss . him We will
 . miss We him will
 We . miss will him
 miss We will . him
But it is possible to limit or remove this special protection with the consent of a majority of this minority.  
It was then a matter of figuring out why a majority of members of these two groups were prepared to relinquish these privileges. 
It is important to point out that representatives of all the groups involved were consulted.  
Be that as it may, honourable senators, this amendment will not spell the end of denominational, be it Catholic or Protestant, education in Quebec. 
The Education Act of this province gives parents the right to choose between Catholic or Protestant denominational education for their children. 
It will be up to parents to decide whether publicly funded denominational education should be maintained indefinitely. 
The fact that the notwithstanding clause was used by the Government of Quebec to protect the existing education legislation seems to indicate, however, that the government reacted favourably to the wish expressed by some parents to maintain Protestant and Catholic denominational schools. 
We have every reason to believe that the place of religion in public education will be subject to a full, open and democratic debate and that the parents' choice will continue to prevail, as it has for so long outside Montreal and Quebec City.  
Throughout the debate that took place before the special joint committee and in this House, we considered the fact that subsection 23(1) of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms does not apply to Quebec and the issue of whether the amendment to section 93 would prejudice the educational rights of native Quebecers. 
Section 23 of the Charter and section 93 of the Constitution Act of 1867 concern educational rights and, instinctively, we might think they are closely linked. 
However, they are not constitutionally related and, in any case it seems entirely ill-advised to reduce consent for constitutional change to a mere transaction where one right serves as a bargaining chip for the improvement of another.  
Honourable senators, I strongly urge you to support this resolution. 
Although we noted there was a consensus to amend section 93, we felt the real issue was the quality of the education of children in Quebec, and on that point opinion was unanimous.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Senator Robichaud, allow me to correct an impression that you left and to ask you a question. 
However, I wanted to make this correction, because you referred to the "government in place", when in fact it was the Liberal government of the day that made the decision, over the objections of the Parti Québécois then in opposition.  
I am asking you the same question I asked Senator Grafstein, but to which I did not get an answer. 
Why is it so important to exempt Quebec from section 93 to allow it to reform its school system? 
What is the connection between the two?  
Senator Robichaud :
 We will miss .
 . We miss him
 . We will miss
 him We . will
The people of North Sydney and Sydney Mines and all in that area will certainly miss him.  
 Sydney North of Mines . people that him The in and and Sydney all will miss area certainly
 area Sydney will and The in that all . of North him certainly miss people and Mines Sydney
 Sydney certainly and people him of . and will The all that Mines Sydney area in North miss
 in of and area North people . will miss all certainly Sydney Mines and that The Sydney him
 of in North Sydney and people Mines and The . all certainly Sydney miss that him area will
 will him and . Sydney and The that people all Sydney North miss certainly area in Mines of
 in Mines Sydney and all The . Sydney him miss area that of and will North certainly people
 certainly Sydney miss people area will and Mines and . of him all that The in Sydney North
 Sydney him all that . and Sydney area Mines in certainly of miss and will people The North
 people North The in certainly Sydney miss Sydney Mines all of and will area and . that him
 Sydney and in area him of and . all miss Mines North certainly that Sydney people The will
 area people certainly of in that and Mines Sydney will North The miss . and him all Sydney
 North Mines and Sydney will miss him Sydney all people certainly and that in The of . area
 miss him Sydney will Mines certainly The Sydney and all of . people area and that North in
 that . Sydney North Sydney The and miss Mines area and certainly in him people all will of
 certainly people The and Mines North will Sydney Sydney in area miss him and all of that .
It is a question of accountability. 
In theory, it is possible that this fund will become larger than the entire budget of the federal government in the years to come. 
Yet we are placing it in the hands of 12 people.  
Does the Honourable Senator Bolduc concur, as Senator Kirby did, that there should be some scrutiny by Senate and House of Commons committees whereby these 12 people who will be sitting on this board will be under a certain amount of scrutiny before they are placed in this lofty, powerful, very responsible position?  
Senator Bolduc :
Honourable senators, that is a very good question. 
There is one thing in the bill that is very acceptable. 
The Auditor General will be able to look at the management of the Investment Board.  
As a result, there will be some accountability in the form of an audit. 
According to Mr. Massé's report, there are 85 to 90 different government organizations. 
This is all very interesting, but none of them will have as much money as the one we are talking about. 
We are talking about an annual amount on the order of 15 per cent to 20 per cent of Canada's gross national product. 
It is an enormous amount. 
I therefore think there has to be some sort of accountability, and one of the ways to achieve that is for parliamentarians to be involved in drafting the Auditor General's report; in my view, there should be an amendment along these lines, to guarantee that that is the case.  
Hon. Jerahmiel S. Grafstein :
Honourable senators, I have a brief question for Senator Bolduc. 
I believe the Caisse de Dépôt is the most powerful pension fund in Canada. 
What accountability does that fund have to the Canadian public?  
Senator Bolduc :
It has not very much accountability to the Canadian public. 
 The people of North Sydney and Sydney Mines all in that area will certainly miss him .
 that and area all him Mines will Sydney of The North miss and in people certainly .
 of Mines and people miss certainly . will Sydney area that North Sydney and The in him
 The all in that and area him North of Mines miss Sydney will certainly . and people
The last time I saw him was in North Sydney on a Sunday afternoon. 
 saw . time was The afternoon in on him Sunday North Sydney a last I
 in Sydney afternoon time on I a was last The him . Sunday saw North
 time on afternoon last Sydney The was . I North saw a him Sunday in
 him in last a saw North afternoon The I on was Sunday time Sydney .
 I a last saw The Sydney . was time on North Sunday afternoon him in
 Sydney was on afternoon . The I last him a Sunday in time saw North
 I afternoon North a last him . in Sydney time Sunday saw The was on
 time him North was saw on a Sydney Sunday I . in last afternoon The
 North afternoon saw I last The in . was him a Sydney Sunday time on
 in him was afternoon North last saw . I a Sydney Sunday The on time
 . Sunday The saw afternoon time Sydney on in a North was I him last
 on . afternoon in Sydney last him North I The a Sunday was saw time
 on in was saw last a I time North The . him Sunday afternoon Sydney
 Sydney in him a afternoon time was . saw Sunday The I on North last
 Sydney a on last The was him afternoon North . in I saw time Sunday
 saw Sunday The a last . I on was Sydney time afternoon in North him
However, committee members were assiduous in assuring all points of view were heard, unlike the Government of Quebec which chose not to have public hearings. 
This made our task doubly difficult.  
As senators, we are unlike any other evidence-gathering body. 
We gather evidence, we serve as our own advisors, seek our own counsel, we become judges, and we become the jury. 
We are the supreme court of the land when it comes to legislation. 
We must view the evidence before committees with care. 
I urge all senators, before they vote, to carefully review the full transcript of the evidence.  
Let me say at the outset that I was very sceptical, particularly after having read the Quebec resolution which was adopted unanimously in the Quebec Assembly, save for two abstentions, and which was quickly passed by the Quebec assembly requesting the federal government amend section 93 of the Constitution by deleting the subsections in so far as their application pertains to Quebec. 
These sections were incorporated in the British North American Act, 1867. 
The Quebec resolution in its fourth recital gave the Quebec assembly's opinion that the proposed amendment to section 93 requested in no way constituted recognition by the Quebec assembly of the Constitution Act, 1982, which was adopted without its consent.  
Honourable senators, noticing as you must that I am and remain a staunch supporter of the Constitution Act, 1982, this caused me great personal grief and concern.  
The first hurdle I had to overcome was whether or not the wording of the Quebec resolution on its face was so invidious, so egregious and so inconsistent that the recital made it inoperable and, in the process, would defeat its own request to amend the 1867 provisions by the mechanisms of the 1982 Constitution.  
I asked myself how the Province of Quebec could be asking for an amendment to the Constitution contained in the 1867 British North America Act, which was now part of the 1982 Constitution, while recognizing that the only methodology available to Parliament would be via the Constitution Act, 1982.  
Section 43 of the 1982 Constitution contains bilateral amendment processes between the federal government and provinces where their interests are solely engaged. 
Clearly, the only highway, the only path the Government of Quebec or the assembly of Quebec could take to achieve its objective was via the 1982 Constitution.  
Honourable senators, I then examined the federal resolution, which is the one we are being asked to consider. 
The federal resolution differs substantially from the Quebec resolutions. 
They are both appended to the report for your consideration.  
The federal resolution made reference not only to the 1982 Constitution, but to section 23 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedom incorporated in the Constitution Act, 1982.  
I concluded, after listening carefully to legal advice proffered before the committee, that the operative clause of any constitutional resolution was the wording of the amending clause itself. 
 The last time I saw him was North Sydney on a Sunday afternoon .
 Sunday . time on was a saw last afternoon Sydney him North The I
 The Sydney North last was . him afternoon Sunday a time saw in I
 was Sydney a North afternoon saw him in time The on I last .
Linda was there with him in his room. 
 room in was Linda him . there with his
 there with him in room was Linda his .
 him . his Linda in was there room with
 with . him was in room there Linda his
 in room . with was him there his Linda
 with him room . was his there in Linda
 Linda . was room in there with him his
 there with was his him in room . Linda
 was with there room Linda him his . in
 Linda his was . with room him there in
 there was in his Linda room him with .
 his room there with Linda in . was him
 was with his room in there . him Linda
 there Linda . his was room in him with
 . there his in him was Linda with room
 in Linda him . his was room there with
Nevertheless, our assembly did not oppose the choice to amend section 93. 
It has always been our conviction that the choice of means is the responsibility of the political authorities.  
They did not oppose.  
The Anglican Archbishop, Archbishop Andrew S. Hutchison, said the following at paragraph 2 of his letter dated November 3: 
The amendments proposed to Article 93 by the Quebec government, which would remove the obligation for the Quebec government to have confessional school boards, seems reasonable to us and in keeping with traditional positions enunciated by the Anglican church.  
Honourable senators, the senior representatives of the mainstream Roman Catholic and Protestant groups did not register their opposition to these changes. 
This does not mean that this exercise was one of perfection. 
Indeed, many of us remain unhappy and regret the federal government's position taken with 23(1)( a ) then and now. 
I share, with Senator Pitfield and others, concern in that respect. 
However, unfortunately, I have a memory, and I recall very well that the 1982 Constitution, for which Senator Pitfield was a senior federal advisor, was a minimalist not a maximalist document. 
It was Senator Pitfield and others in power at the time who determined that, in order to pass the 1982 Constitution, the Province of Quebec should be given the option of proclaiming section 23(1)( a ) and that the notwithstanding clause would be incorporated in the 1982 Constitution to eviscerate the charter, both serious sources of our current distress.  
Many of us objected strenuously then, and do now, to giving the Province of Quebec these options. 
However, that is history. 
Many of us objected to the notwithstanding clause pressed by the other provinces, particularly Manitoba. 
Senator Pitfield was there. 
He understood that. 
This I remember.  
However flawed the 1982 Constitution was with regard to these two aspects, the special joint committee shared a defining moment. 
For the first time since 1982, two ministers from the Province of Quebec have appeared before a special joint committee of Parliament in Ottawa and have, in public hearings, given de facto and de jure recognition to the 1982 Constitution. 
Pluralism and the new demographics was the dialectic that we heard emanating from the Bloc members. 
 Linda was there with him his room .
 . with was in room Linda there his
 Linda him . in there his was room
 with there him his room . Linda was
He was able to speak, but only barely. 
 barely was speak , able only but to . He
 to . barely able He speak only but , was
 . barely speak , He able to but only was
 barely . speak He only but to , able was
 but to . barely speak able He , was only
 but . only to was able speak barely , He
 . speak to He , able barely was only but
 He was but barely . , only able speak to
 . only He , able to barely but speak was
 , He able was speak but only . to barely
 He but barely , to able only speak . was
 barely only , He speak but able . was to
 to speak only barely , was . but He able
 , to barely He but able speak . was only
 barely , speak . able but only to He was
 . only barely speak He able , but was to
No point of view went unexamined, save for one raised by the Reform Party at the last minute, and I will deal with that later.  
Let me for a moment repeat what we heard. 
There was a unanimous resolution, save for two abstentions, from the Quebec assembly. 
We heard from the opposition in the assembly; the Quebec government itself; English and French school boards; Catholic, Protestant and other teachers' groups; archbishops of the Roman Catholic church and the Anglican archbishop of Quebec, which I will deal with later; minority groups including Jewish, Arab, non-Roman Catholic and other allophone groups; students groups, both English and French. 
All agreed that linguistic school boards, which were a direct consequence of this amendment, were desirable and progressive.  
There was some dissent. 
I will briefly touch on it, as did Senator Bolduc in his most insightful speech, especially with respect to the plight of certain French-speaking Protestants and certain English-speaking Catholics. 
There is no question at all that some in those groups feel detrimentally affected.  
Again, under the current Quebec law 109, the notwithstanding clauses had been included, both with respect to the Quebec Charter and the federal Charter of Rights and Freedoms, therefore allowing for denominational teaching to be continued in Quebec. 
How the Quebec government will ultimately continue to afford opportunities for denominational teaching is a much more difficult question to predict. 
However, it is clear to me, from all the evidence I heard and carefully cross-examined, that the majorities of the so-called minorities favoured this change. 
There appeared to be some exceptions at the outset that must be addressed.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, I regret to interrupt but the allotted 15 minutes has expired. 
Is leave granted for Senator Grafstein to continue?  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
Senator Grafstein :
Alliance Quebec, the foremost, mainstream English group, appeared at first to oppose section 93. 
However, on cross examination - and this is the value of the committee hearings - their interest was not so much in opposing section 93. 
 He was able to speak but only barely .
 , was only barely He speak to . but
 able but was only . speak to , He
 He only , but was . speak barely to
Just before I left he asked her to pour a glass of whiskey for him and me. 
 of before to whiskey left I him glass pour and me asked her Just a he for .
 me I whiskey him for . Just to before pour glass her of and asked he a left
 I and him of left to whiskey me for her he pour glass before . a Just asked
 a I and he whiskey asked of . me Just her for left pour before glass him to
 whiskey for him left Just before he pour her . of asked me to glass a I and
 her Just to and pour I of . for glass before him a he me asked whiskey left
 asked glass a I before left to for . me and her of he Just whiskey him pour
 I whiskey me left asked before to and of glass for pour Just he her him a .
 left and he me I a . whiskey him Just to her of asked before pour glass for
 him of to a for whiskey . her asked pour I he Just glass before me left and
 him pour I for a he left and before me her to glass Just . of whiskey asked
 pour glass and I whiskey before Just . a him to left asked for he me of her
 me before of left a I and . Just him whiskey to he her pour glass asked for
 a of Just her asked whiskey before and to me he left pour for . glass I him
 her . a I glass me and for he him pour to asked Just of left whiskey before
 and for her me . he glass I pour asked before to Just whiskey left him a of
Second Reading-Debate Continued 
On the Order: 
Resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Kirby, seconded by the Honourable Senator Joyal, P.C., for the second reading of Bill C-2, to establish the Canada Pension Plan Investment Board and to amend the Canada Pension Plan and the Old Age Security Act and to make consequential amendments to other Acts.  
Hon. David Tkachuk :
However, there are a number of important issues that we believe are relevant and important not only to this side of the house but to all senators. 
Some senators, including me, are interested in this bill from a personal point of view as well. 
This bill was brought in last week so that we could work on it. 
Now, we must complete that work and pass the bill by Christmas. 
I do not think that we are handmaidens. 
We do not have to take orders. 
We must do what is right.  
This bill has important consequences for many of us, and more particularly, for our children and our grandchildren. 
Those people who are already retired and at the age of 65 will receive all their benefits. 
For those people who are in the middle and who will soon be retiring, it is not a big problem for them. 
They will have some reduced benefits and some increased costs. 
To those people who have been paying all their lives - that is, all the baby boomers who will begin to turn 50 - they will receive benefits and be faced with another 15 years of increased costs.  
I will tell you for whom this is important. 
I have a daughter who is 24 and a son who is 21. 
Many of you have children and grandchildren. 
The government is asking them to pay 9.9 per cent - I am sure it is 9.9 per cent because the minister wanted the number to be under the figure 10. That represents 10 per cent of their income, and it will increase with inflation. 
 Just before I left he asked her to pour a glass of whiskey for him me .
 glass of . her whiskey Just to for before me him and pour a asked left he
 for I . before glass and whiskey left pour he me Just to asked him a her
 glass left he whiskey asked pour . and a of him her for me to Just I
He asked her to pour a drink for him and me. 
 pour . for to and asked me He him a her drink
 him a pour asked me . He for and drink to her
 asked pour drink to her him for He and a . me
 her He to asked for pour drink and a him . me
 drink to a for me pour He her and . him asked
 to . and drink asked her pour me He a for him
 drink asked for her me and . to a pour him He
 for pour asked He her a him and to drink me .
 her and me asked to for pour him drink . He a
 drink He me her . asked for a to and pour him
 pour drink him asked her me to a for He and .
 and her me pour him a to He drink asked . for
 drink asked He to for and a her pour me . him
 a me asked to him drink . pour and her for He
 me him pour for and her a . drink to asked He
 and me pour him a for her asked He to . drink
QUESTION PERIOD 
Federal-Provincial Relations 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Province of Quebec-Request for Particulars 
Hon. Fernand Roberge :
Honourable senators, my question follows the announcement made yesterday regarding the government's decision to set at $12.5 billion the cash floor for transfer payments made under the Canada health and social transfer (CHST). 
The government would have us believe that this amount represents an increase in health care payments. 
However, the figures indicate otherwise.  
The following year, in 1999-2000, they will only be $3.748 billion. 
Yet, the government claimed yesterday that it was implementing a stable transfer system. 
In fact, cash payments paid to Quebec for health and education will be reduced by over $300 million over a five-year period. 
Honourable senators, I remind you that these cuts are in addition to this year's reduction of $700 million compared to last year. 
Could the minister make inquiries and inform the Senate of the reasons why, in spite of a cash floor set at $12.5 billion, Quebec's share will diminish by $307 million over the next five years?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
The federal government cut its own spending earlier, more drastically and in greater measure than transfers to the provinces. 
The government has made it clear that it will use increased fiscal flexibility to make strategic investments in priority areas, and action was taken early and directly on that commitment based on favourable fiscal results that emerged this past spring.  
With respect to individual provinces, I do not have those numbers. 
However, I would be happy to provide them for my honourable friend.  
Senator Roberge :
Could the minister find out at the same time why, in the same time period, Ontario's share of the cash transfers will increase to $173 million?  
Senator Graham :
 He asked to pour a drink for him and me .
 . to me him asked and her a pour He drink
 a him to drink asked me for and her He .
 a and drink her for He to me him pour .
John knew that my daughter is married to a fellow from Dublin, although they live in Halifax. 
 they a live to that fellow knew in is John Halifax from married Dublin , my . although daughter
 a fellow in from they , Halifax is my to that daughter married although . John knew Dublin live
 although from married . fellow , daughter live Dublin Halifax is knew in my a John that they to
 to John a knew live they Dublin that Halifax in fellow from . although is married , my daughter
 married , Dublin Halifax although . to a they from live daughter that is fellow my in knew John
 they from live Dublin , although Halifax is my a married John . fellow knew that daughter in to
 daughter Dublin in from , they a John my Halifax married is . although knew to that live fellow
 to they live in my although . fellow from that daughter Dublin , is knew married John Halifax a
 to knew Halifax is Dublin a , married live in they from daughter my although John fellow that .
 , knew to daughter Dublin they live John . from is Halifax although a fellow that in married my
 to John my fellow they . Dublin from although , married Halifax knew a daughter that live is in
 although to live married in is from that knew Dublin , fellow a they Halifax John my daughter .
 from live fellow although to married that Dublin they my . , Halifax daughter John in a knew is
 to my that they although fellow knew Halifax is Dublin from , in daughter a live married John .
 , knew married Halifax my is John from fellow although live . in a they that Dublin to daughter
 live knew Dublin a is married that my John . fellow although from daughter to they in , Halifax
They are seeking to renovate their system under the rule of law and the Constitution.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
That is not my question.  
Senator Grafstein :
I assume that if they choose to proceed, they can. 
However, why should we in the Senate allow any province to proceed in a way that we consider unlawful? 
If there is an amendment to the Constitution, each senator in his or her heart and mind, after reviewing the testimony, must come to a conclusion. 
He or she can either vote for, against or abstain from the vote on the resolution.  
They want to be under the law, as does the Province of Newfoundland. 
They want to be under the Constitution. 
If they meet the standards of a constitutional change, I, for one, will support them, notwithstanding the fact that I mistrust their motivation and mistrust what they say. 
However, on matter of dealing with the rule of law, I am bound by the rule of law.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
My question has nothing to do with that answer. 
It was renewed in 1982 and given protection from the Charter. 
Quebec has finally adopted a linguistic school system that looks very promising and can be implemented without section 93 being amended, unlike Newfoundland, which needs an amendment to Term 17 to be able to implement a non-denominational system. 
The two resolutions are completely different in content and intent.  
Again, my question relates to the fact that the new linguistic school board process is well under way. 
There will be elections to the boards in June. 
What impact does the modification of section 93 or the non-modification of section 93 have on what is already under way?  
 John knew that my daughter is married to a from Dublin , although they live in Halifax .
 a married live from my knew is Halifax fellow to , although in . daughter that Dublin they
 daughter . , knew in although that John they to a fellow live from married is Halifax my
 married although John that live they . knew , is a in Dublin daughter fellow to my Halifax
I told him, "As I told you before, my son-in-law and daughter have been after me to go to Dublin to visit his parents. 
 law and you , to " me son - after daughter told parents visit As have his to I , him told in my been to - . go I before Dublin
 law to in him to my visit told parents - . - Dublin daughter As , son to I " go been you me , have I and after told before his
 son been him I - visit daughter go I to law , you told parents told his my - As " after to me Dublin , . in have to before and
 in , and go - I law As son daughter visit . you him to to his been - me parents told my have before , I to told Dublin after "
 law to go - you to me visit have after son , I - parents I to , and my before his him told daughter . As told in " been Dublin
 to me - parents law been before and to , I his him I my Dublin to you told " after son . daughter have in told - , go As visit
 . before son visit to " in parents me , law his I daughter , to told to - I you and Dublin told my go - after As been him have
 . - I " visit told to , after to his , daughter me Dublin parents been son him told in have to go and you - As my law before I
 me his Dublin have go been to . you to him son , daughter As - parents told told to " , I visit after my in law and before I -
 my go , I and to - Dublin him As law you - I after have daughter before , in told visit me . son " told his to to parents been
 I been to law Dublin parents to told visit " and after my , son - daughter As him you have me to I - . in before told , go his
 his " have . daughter to go I my , I before to told parents law told in , you - and me been Dublin visit him - son to As after
 I him after to my . " parents son in visit daughter to , - to you have told told I , his As Dublin law before me been go and -
 As have to me law in his to after parents , - to you . Dublin and I been him visit - " go daughter my I before told , told son
 - - I told " Dublin I been to my me to law . before go told son daughter in his have parents after As you , to and visit him ,
 , told to parents to son Dublin visit I told been - . daughter I his to after in my before go , you him " law and have me - As
Given their authorship, I think we have to reflect seriously on these thoughts.  
Before we finally vote, honourable senators, I trust that when the resolution itself is before us we can go into Committee of the Whole to hear any witness who was not heard by the joint committee and whose reflections will guide us. 
In particular, I refer to the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs who, after all, is the sponsor of this resolution on behalf of the Government of Canada. 
He is as well placed as anyone to reply to concerns expressed here and elsewhere. 
I would expect that he would welcome the opportunity to do so before a vote is taken.  
I feel strongly that the minister must share his views with this house and engage in an open and frank exchange directly with its members. 
I urge the leadership on the other side to arrange such a meeting at the earliest opportunity.  
There are still too many unanswered questions and disturbing uncertainties for many senators on both sides of this house to state a firm position at this time. 
The minister should be able to provide assurance, the lack of which so far has caused many of us here to remain hesitant to support this resolution, myself included.  
Hon. Jerahmiel S. Grafstein :
Honourable senators, education is everyone's business. 
When citizens debate their children's education, sometimes passion overwhelms reason.  
It was with some trepidation that I entered the thicket of the Quebec school question, coming as I do from the province of Ontario. 
The dense history of the Quebec school question holds lessons for us all.  
Once appointed to the committee, I set about to better understand the tangled roots of history lying beneath this question, to digest as best I could the numerous articles, studies and especially reports commissioned by successive Quebec governments over the last few years ranging from the articulate Parent commission to the Kenniff report to the findings of the Estates General. 
It became evident to me that a deep and thorough consensus had developed for radical reformation, at least among the elites of Quebec. 
Claude Ryan, an old friend of mine and the then Minister of Education, had galvanized that reform process over a decade ago in Quebec. 
It was equally clear to me that the existing school structures were in desperate need of renovation, particularly in light of the overlapping school structures in Quebec and the financial restraints facing all governments.  
Rather than an historic essay, perhaps it would be simpler if I could share with you my thought processes and the evidence I found as a member of the Standing Senate Committee on the Quebec Resolution Requesting Constitutional Change.  
First, a brief word about committees and their work. 
 I told him , " As I told you before my son - in - law and daughter have been after me to go to Dublin to visit his parents .
 . before been his , - As and parents my have in Dublin me " you to I I law visit daughter go after told him - son to to told
 my me parents . , and to been visit you told have after told daughter his to in I before - him to - I " son law , go Dublin
 son to me . him and law - " in daughter told you As told visit have - , been parents to his , before go Dublin my I I to
I am going on Tuesday John M., but I will be back in ten days." 
 am on Tuesday I will days ., ." ten but M be back in John going I
 ten will in ." I days but ., I be M back John on going am Tuesday
 M going John ., back but on ." days ten will be in Tuesday am I I
 back in going ., M John ." be I but am I will days ten on Tuesday
 on but I will in ., ." days Tuesday going be I John back M ten am
 on be days back M in ." Tuesday I ten John but ., will am I going
 ." M am be Tuesday I on will days going back but ten in John ., I
 in ., but on Tuesday ." be going am M I ten will back days I John
 M going days will am I I John but Tuesday ." in back ., on be ten
 Tuesday ten John I M on going back will but be days am ." I in .,
 but going M will Tuesday back in John I ." days ten be ., am on I
 going will be days Tuesday on M in but ." ., am ten I I back John
 I will John be ." going back ., but M on in am I ten Tuesday days
 Tuesday I ten in ." be M ., but back days will on John I am going
 John ., am going ." will on M I ten be but in back Tuesday I days
 will going John ten M I ." I ., in days Tuesday but on back be am
Perhaps honourable senators opposite do not want to hear what Paul Martin will be doing, and the explaining that you will have to do back home in 10 or 15 years when your children ask you what you did about this bill. 
When they retire, their CPP benefits will be worth about what they put in, plus 2.5 per cent.  
I do not get it. 
I do not understand why we are being asked to do that to our children, so that those who are retiring today can receive full benefits and those who are retiring soon can get their benefits. 
I do not get it. 
I will try to explain it today, and - I hope I can convince you.  
The CPP is part of a larger program that Paul Martin is introducing. 
Everything involves reform. 
We will have a reform of the Old Age Security benefit, which is coming up after Christmas. 
It is important to get through this before Christmas so that we can consider changes in the cut-backs that will come due after Christmas. 
We on this side think that both matters should be discussed together because it is part of a pension program and a part of a social security net for people in this country who retire at 65 and who want to retire with some dignity.  
We strongly believe that this measure is a payroll tax and a job killer. 
Yesterday, Senator Kirby said it was not a payroll tax. 
The Department of Finance did a study in April 1995 which was reported in The Toronto Star . 
The study noted that the relatively modest increase of CPP premiums between 1986 and 1993 resulted in 26,000 fewer jobs. 
It further noted that the increases have had and will continue to have a negative impact on the labour force. 
That contradicts the government's arguments that CPP premiums are not a payroll tax but, rather, a pension contribution. 
In their own report, the Department of Finance stated that employers' contributions to CPP and the Quebec Pension Plan are part of the compulsory payroll tax. 
The department warned against higher payroll taxes in that same report and called this tax just that, namely, a payroll tax.  
We on this side strongly believe there are a number of important issues contained in this bill that we should discuss before it is passed. 
 I am going on Tuesday John M ., but I will be back in ten ."
 M ten am ., going I will John back on ." days but I be Tuesday
 back John I be ." but going on Tuesday I ten ., in M am days
 John ." going but back I on will am days I Tuesday in be ten M
He looked up at me from the bed and said, "I will try to stay on until you get back."  
 you at get stay bed and until " try the I from said He , back looked will up ." me to on
 on until He said you ." from bed get try will the and up stay I " to me , back looked at
 stay will and the me said you from back try " ." He get looked until at on up , to I bed
 me looked ." He back try stay bed from to at " get the I will said on you up , and until
 the looked until me to He at " said try will get from ." on bed stay back you and up , I
 until back bed get " looked at ." said stay , will me from up I try the you He and on to
 on get until to me I you ." He will the up stay try , said bed looked at from and back "
 to I you try me back at " bed from , will stay until get said ." He looked the on up and
 me from He I the stay up will looked try , said to at bed " ." until back on and get you
 from you He get up and " on back the looked bed , will to at said try I stay ." me until
 get ." from at to me bed back looked stay I you until said , He the " and up on try will
 get bed to me at " will looked stay I try ." said and you back on from the until up , He
 get looked will I from bed He try stay on at back ." me said to the , and up you until "
 me try until back " get and looked will to He the you at stay , I bed ." from up on said
 looked will you me bed up back and from get I the said , to at He stay try on ." " until
 looked stay and I said you will try ." at from on get to me the back up , " He bed until
It is simply paying more money for less benefits. 
Anyone can do that. 
Even the Liberals can do that.  
The government is unable to manage the present program so it wants more money to enable it to manage it better. 
We must remember that the author of Bill C-2 is Paul Martin. 
Paul Martin is a real smart guy. 
We remember that he had to stoop to bribing three Atlantic provinces, with other people's money, to fulfil his promises of harmonization. 
He later apologized to the Canadian people for misinforming them.  
Meanwhile, the Prime Minister and Deputy Prime Minister, Sheila Copps, were promising to get rid of the GST, but they did not really mean it, they said, although they were caught out on tape not telling the truth.  
Paul Martin promised in the old Red Book that the government would cancel the helicopter purchase and use the money to pay for more social programs. 
Now, $900 million later, we have no helicopters that fly safely. 
He penned the Red Book to renegotiate the free trade agreement. 
He took all the kudos after the 1993 election.  
Now he says: "Rush Bill C-2. 
Trust me." 
The minister says that he needs the bill now to satisfy an agreement with the provinces. 
I have heard of no agreement. 
No one here has heard of an agreement. 
If someone on the other side knows of an agreement, please tell me.  
We have not heard one province asking us to abandon our parliamentary responsibilities and rush this bill through by January 1 on the threat that they will cancel their agreement. 
 He looked up at me from the bed and said , " I will try to stay on until you back ."
 stay you " will and He try the , me said back to on from up I get at bed looked until
 ." looked you , until I up said try get stay will " at on from and bed back to me He
 at up will the me looked bed get until and , try on ." stay " you said I back to from
Unfortunately, he did not. 
 did not he Unfortunately . ,
 not Unfortunately , . did he
 he . , not Unfortunately did
 , . did he not Unfortunately
 . , did not Unfortunately he
 , not he did . Unfortunately
 he Unfortunately did , not .
 he not . did Unfortunately ,
 he , not Unfortunately . did
 not he Unfortunately did . ,
 did he not , Unfortunately .
 Unfortunately . he not , did
 not he Unfortunately did , .
 Unfortunately . , he not did
 . not , did Unfortunately he
 not did . Unfortunately he ,
It costs more money. 
I am not saying that is bad. 
I am just saying that all of a sudden it costs more money because women are either lucky or live better or cleaner lives than men, and they live longer.  
Senator Gigantès :
They survive us. 
It takes strength and intelligence.  
Senator Moore :
Meaning we are not intelligent?  
Senator Gigantès :
Not as much as the women are.  
Senator Tkachuk :
Then the benefits were extended. 
The provision went from having to live together for seven years to share in CPP benefits - in other words, when one died the other one would pick up the cash - down to one year. 
If you lived together for one year, the other person was considered your husband or your wife, and benefits again were extended to the surviving spouse - another increased cost.  
Yesterday, Senator Kirby alluded to the possibility that there may be other social changes in those arrangements. 
I know what that means. 
It is possible that governments may recognize gay marriages, and I think he wanted to let us know that there may be these kinds of changes taking place. 
That is fine, if the government wants to do that. 
Now you have two guys living together; one dies, the other one is picking up some cash. 
That costs more money. 
 Unfortunately he did not .
 Unfortunately he , . not
 , he Unfortunately . did
 . did not Unfortunately he
I called Joe and Anne from Dublin. 
 from Joe Dublin called I and . Anne
 Dublin Anne I and Joe from . called
 and from Dublin . Joe Anne I called
 and from Anne I called Joe . Dublin
 from called I Joe Dublin Anne and .
 from . called I Joe Anne Dublin and
 Dublin Joe from called I Anne . and
 . and called Joe from Anne I Dublin
 and Dublin I Anne called Joe from .
 Anne Joe Dublin I called from and .
 and Joe I from Dublin called Anne .
 . Dublin Anne and called I Joe from
 Dublin . called Anne I from Joe and
 Dublin from Joe called . and Anne I
 I and Anne . Dublin Joe called from
 Joe Dublin Anne called and I . from
If the honourable senator did not get answers to all his questions, that is an entirely different matter. 
On motion of Senator Kinsella, for Senator Simard, debate adjourned.  
Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration 
Sixth Report of Committee Adopted 
The Senate proceeded to consideration of the sixth report of the Standing Committee on Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration (budgets for certain committees), presented in the Senate on December 4, 1997.  
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, I move, on behalf of Senator Rompkey, the adoption of this report.  
Motion agreed to and report adopted.  
Telecommunications Act Teleglobe Canada Reorganization and Divestiture Act 
Bill to Amend-First Reading 
The Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C-17, to amend the Telecommunications Act and the Teleglobe Canada Reorganization and Divestiture Act. 
Bill read first time.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this bill be read the second time?  
On motion of Senator Carstairs, bill placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading on Thursday, December 11, 1997.  
Canada Marine Bill 
First Reading 
The Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C-9, for making the system of Canadian ports competitive, efficient and commercially oriented, providing for the establishing of port authorities and the divesting of certain harbours and ports, for the commercialization of the St. Lawrence Seaway and ferry services and other matters related to maritime trade and transport and amending the Pilotage Act and amending and repealing other Acts as a consequence.  
Bill read first time.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
 I called Joe and Anne Dublin .
 I . from Anne and Dublin Joe
 called and from Dublin . Joe Anne
 called Dublin and Anne from . Joe
I spoke to Bob Muir and the others at the funeral home and almost decided to try to get a plane home, but of course that was impossible.  
 and impossible others I to home plane the . get try Muir to but of Bob that funeral home decided almost was , course spoke to the at a and
 spoke try plane impossible home , . of at and Bob a I others course and that get was the Muir funeral almost but to home to decided the to
 but at plane Bob Muir and a almost I funeral decided was home the get others try , to course spoke that home of impossible to . and the to
 Muir the course of impossible try the home get , but decided funeral at to to I others plane that and home Bob was almost . and to spoke a
 I impossible , a home was course but of to at Muir home spoke decided plane funeral . get try almost Bob to others the and that and the to
 impossible course of but spoke get decided home the try and funeral to Muir and to almost others the home . to a was at plane that , I Bob
 a funeral and Muir get the at try that Bob course to . decided plane home I was the to spoke but impossible almost others to home of , and
 was the but others . funeral to course and home at and of get spoke Muir try plane Bob to , decided home to I impossible almost the that a
 a funeral at I course home get Muir almost to , the to that plane but was home others of . impossible spoke and Bob the and to try decided
 to of Bob that , a impossible the the almost but others . plane and was to and home Muir decided home to try at get funeral course spoke I
 decided funeral , at course and spoke home get to was others I almost a to plane and but try the home impossible . the that Bob Muir to of
 . Muir decided was Bob home funeral the impossible a and almost I plane , but try others to that at to of get and home to the course spoke
 but , others that to try funeral get the I Muir the home impossible and of at almost decided course a . home was to Bob spoke and plane to
 decided but of home that try was I Bob spoke to plane to the and funeral at and others course . the , Muir home a to impossible almost get
 I others to a Muir to course get funeral plane to impossible but Bob . spoke home and the try almost was and , home at decided the that of
 of course I try impossible others to funeral . a Muir spoke almost that but home was to , Bob at and and plane get decided the to home the
QUESTION PERIOD 
Federal-Provincial Relations 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Province of Quebec-Request for Particulars 
Hon. Fernand Roberge :
Honourable senators, my question follows the announcement made yesterday regarding the government's decision to set at $12.5 billion the cash floor for transfer payments made under the Canada health and social transfer (CHST). 
The government would have us believe that this amount represents an increase in health care payments. 
However, the figures indicate otherwise.  
The following year, in 1999-2000, they will only be $3.748 billion. 
Yet, the government claimed yesterday that it was implementing a stable transfer system. 
In fact, cash payments paid to Quebec for health and education will be reduced by over $300 million over a five-year period. 
Honourable senators, I remind you that these cuts are in addition to this year's reduction of $700 million compared to last year. 
Could the minister make inquiries and inform the Senate of the reasons why, in spite of a cash floor set at $12.5 billion, Quebec's share will diminish by $307 million over the next five years?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
The federal government cut its own spending earlier, more drastically and in greater measure than transfers to the provinces. 
The government has made it clear that it will use increased fiscal flexibility to make strategic investments in priority areas, and action was taken early and directly on that commitment based on favourable fiscal results that emerged this past spring.  
With respect to individual provinces, I do not have those numbers. 
However, I would be happy to provide them for my honourable friend.  
Senator Roberge :
Could the minister find out at the same time why, in the same time period, Ontario's share of the cash transfers will increase to $173 million?  
Senator Graham :
 I spoke to Bob Muir and the others at the funeral home almost decided to try to get a plane home , but of course that was impossible .
 impossible a home was to the try to of plane . at to and almost , and spoke funeral but I home Muir others Bob the decided that course
 home of to course but and the home that plane I was the to funeral and Muir almost try a at impossible to Bob others . spoke get decided
 spoke course funeral try home almost Bob but a Muir the and was of the to impossible others to . decided get I plane that to , and at
I will remember the conversations that I had with him through the years. 
 conversations years the remember I had I the will . through with him that
 him the the had will years conversations through . remember I that with I
 the the I with I him . will years conversations had that through remember
 the through I with years the had him I will remember that conversations .
 the conversations years I with remember will the . that I through had him
 I I will with the . conversations had him through that the remember years
 him had remember the will the conversations I years through I . that with
 him remember the conversations I had years that the I will through with .
 conversations will the with years through I I the remember him . had that
 remember . through him that the had I years conversations the will I with
 that with had remember years the I . I conversations him will through the
 . the the that years I had with I through him remember conversations will
 . the I I the years that had with through him conversations will remember
 years remember the through will him conversations I had . I that the with
 the him I remember I the conversations . had years will with that through
 that I him the remember I had with . the years conversations will through
4. I would like to have these points clarified but not in the media. 
I truly appreciate all the support I have received from my colleagues regarding this subject. 
Thanks to all of you.  
History of the Vote in Canada 
Book Launched by Governor General 
Hon. Mabel M. DeWare :
Honourable senators, yesterday, the Right Honourable Romeo LeBlanc, Governor General of Canada, launched an important new book, A History of the Vote in Canada , which recounts how the right to vote has evolved over the past 250 years. 
The book starts at the time of the first elected legislatures in what is now Canada and ends with the most recent federal election. 
It traces changes in voting eligibility, electioneering and voting practices, as well as voter turnout since Confederation. 
Extension of the vote to those who were excluded legally from the franchise, such as women, aboriginal people, religious and racial minorities, is examined in the social context of the period.  
Even though most Canadian adults were eligible to vote by 1920, there is a final chapter that looks at ways to make voting accessible to everyone, including people in all geographic locations and people with physical disabilities.  
A History of the Vote in Canada is meant to be an educational resource and a reminder to Canadians of the significance of the right to vote. 
This is in keeping with Elections Canada's 1993 mandate to educate voters about the democratic right to vote.  
While this book will appeal to historians, political scientists, university and high school teachers and students, it is hoped that it will also reach those who may have difficulty exercising their right to vote.  
As parliamentarians, honourable senators, it is our role to help promote this book and educate our fellow citizens on their rights as voters.  
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
Report of Committee 
Hon. Ron Ghitter , Chair of the Standing Senate Committee on Energy, the Environment and Natural Resources, presented the following report: 
Tuesday, December 9, 1997 
The Standing Senate Committee on Energy, the Environment and Natural Resources has the honour to present its 
 I remember the conversations that I had with him through the years .
 will with had I years through that . remember him the I conversations
 years the I had him the conversations through will I with . remember
 the remember conversations him the I . had will I that through with
I know that he must be very pleased and honoured, as he is looking down on us today, that Sister Peggy will continue his work, as she always has, of championing Cape Bretoners.  
 that will Peggy and very , Bretoners Sister I looking continue work know . he us as , has Cape of , honoured championing , is down she as be today his on pleased that always he must
 . continue today , down Bretoners honoured us , must she is be Peggy I on Sister , he will his Cape as and , know looking of he has championing that pleased always that as work very
 that us as is very he down that championing continue know always pleased work be she as and on Peggy his Bretoners he Cape of will looking , has must , today , I . honoured Sister ,
 Bretoners work , will today and always very as continue has , down on looking honoured that he know . must is Sister as his Peggy pleased be that she , championing I , Cape of he us
 is that championing I and of , he . that Bretoners his she Peggy be down as on must always , continue Cape know Sister , very he as us looking today pleased honoured work has will ,
 looking , Cape pleased and honoured he I work , , today very he is Peggy championing , of must as continue has that on Bretoners will always Sister as she that his . us down know be
 is as I Bretoners must be and she work his , us down he championing know Cape pleased that Peggy has Sister as very continue he , , , will looking of honoured . on today always that
 continue . on that Cape looking as Sister will know , honoured he his down , , I work must very he be pleased and has is Bretoners today us championing always as that she Peggy of ,
 as must Peggy as of very on pleased has that Bretoners us will be that , down continue know I his , looking , he Sister and , she Cape championing work . honoured is he always today
 , be must as work , Cape down is Sister he and championing will Bretoners , know of looking that Peggy today as always very his , on has us that I . honoured she he pleased continue
 will on Sister always very continue pleased , us down I know and that that of championing , his . must Bretoners , today she he is honoured as as work , has Peggy be Cape looking he
 continue on , Peggy us be , very down his today pleased he . know , that I honoured championing he as Cape and work has as Sister must will looking , that she of Bretoners is always
 as he Peggy has his and always as work , , today us know must will championing down , Cape looking very pleased is I of continue honoured on Bretoners she Sister he be that . , that
 know will today Sister , honoured is , be has that continue he on he always as Bretoners . Peggy championing must and , I that as of work , down Cape looking pleased very his us she
 is looking on us be and . his as honoured that Peggy down today continue he Sister I very pleased , , of must as Cape always , she work will , know has he that championing Bretoners
 he , of down , on I that Peggy has is honoured must very and today she his . that looking Cape as always , us as be , pleased know will championing Sister work Bretoners he continue
Foreign Affairs 
Committee Authorized to Meet During Sitting of the Senate 
Hon. John B. Stewart :
Honourable senators, with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58(1)( a ), I move: 
That the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs have power to sit at 3:15 p.m. tomorrow, Wednesday, December 10, even though the Senate may then be sitting, and that rule 95(4) be suspended in relation thereto.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is leave granted, honourable senators?  
Hon. Noël A. Kinsella (Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition) :
Honourable senators, in the past two years or so, there has been a common understanding in this chamber that Wednesdays would constitute a short day. 
This is why we have been meeting at 1:30 p.m. The general understanding is that we try to finish our business in the chamber by about 3:30 p.m. 
In the past few weeks, we have heard requests like the one raised by the Honourable Senator Stewart. 
If the request speaks to a Tuesday or a Thursday, when we normally meet at 2 p.m. and sit a little longer, there would be no difficulty, all things being equal, in granting leave. 
However, I am having some difficulty in granting leave for a day when we are supposed to be having a short day in any event.  
I would ask the honourable Chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee if he would explain his motion in light of the fact that Wednesday is a short day.  
Senator Stewart :
Honourable senators, there are two points:
First, we are hoping tomorrow to have a timely assessment of the achievements of the APEC meetings.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Watch out for the pepper spray!  
Senator Stewart :
 I know that he must be very pleased and honoured , as he is looking down on us today , that Sister Peggy will his work , as she always has , of championing Cape Bretoners .
 he championing down I looking , as continue and , us has work will Cape that , . Peggy he she always of be very his honoured today that know Sister is must , pleased Bretoners as
 us , honoured Peggy be I that work that very is Cape his know of has today championing as down must Bretoners continue as and , . pleased , he will , always he on she looking
 Sister as will he championing looking , us , that and I his pleased honoured know has continue that down Bretoners must as she , , work . Peggy of very is be today he on Cape
As Senator Murray said, I know how pleased John M. must be to know that you, Sister Peggy, are replacing him as a senator from Cape Breton. 
 senator must Sister pleased Cape replacing John to Peggy Breton , As know M . that as a , him Murray I from said . you are how Senator , know be
 replacing that As I . senator Sister from , must , to Breton him pleased Peggy M John as Murray are know Senator said Cape how be . a , know you
 know , a are Breton . Murray , replacing . that John how , must I Cape from to pleased As said Peggy senator know M be as Sister him you Senator
 know senator that to a pleased , from know Murray you Breton be , replacing as Senator him As how must Peggy . Sister M John are I , Cape . said
 know As from M must Peggy , replacing Breton are him to pleased Senator , know said how senator Murray a as Cape be , Sister . . you John that I
 are to , Senator M , from be him said , you Cape As must senator Murray how . Breton as pleased that a I know John . Peggy know replacing Sister
 Peggy Senator you As . John are M must as a from Breton that to . know senator pleased know be replacing said , , I Cape , how Sister Murray him
 Breton . are a , John , . Senator senator replacing know As Sister you how as Cape from Peggy be M that pleased said must know him , to Murray I
 said Murray Breton know M I Peggy Sister Cape know John . to you him senator , as As must be Senator from how pleased replacing a that , are , .
 Breton senator you that Sister pleased know him to Cape replacing , as are Murray Senator be . As , I must M Peggy John from . , said how know a
 know replacing , Sister know M as Breton Cape senator are As , that . how said I him to you from pleased a must Senator be . John Peggy Murray ,
 know a Breton , Senator him you from as I that John , be , . As Sister . pleased senator to are said Peggy how Murray replacing know M Cape must
 as replacing said M him Sister senator from know I a Breton that Murray Senator Cape be how John to , Peggy , must know are As , . pleased . you
 senator to Murray said that pleased as . Sister I how must a him Peggy M are , know Cape you Senator . replacing be , know John from , Breton As
 Breton Senator be how know As Cape said , replacing Peggy a Murray , . must M , I John to that as you know from pleased Sister senator him are .
 senator , replacing you a from M . how . Senator Breton are him as know Peggy that to must be know I Cape said Sister Murray pleased , , As John
However, how can the performance of a monopoly be assessed? 
And do you know of any monopoly where unacceptable mismanagement did not occur at one time or another? 
There is a long list of unfortunate cases of poor management - we have all heard stories of the extravagant expense accounts of people in the public sector who think they own the jobs they are holding - of bad investments, such as those made in real estate by an agency like the one we are creating, for example, of consumer gouging - we have seen monopolies charge excessive rates, because they were the only ones providing the service - of unreasonable benefits, such as complete job security for employees at the expense of the taxpayer - as has occurred in crown corporations you are familiar with - of differences in economic and social objectives - this also happened when an agency was created and given a mandate, and then after 15 years, it started doing something else, we have all seen this - of conflicts of interest involving officials who make no difference between their personal interest and that of the public, et cetera.  
There is a long list of horror stories involving monopolies. 
The whole history of the public sector, here and elsewhere, is full of such unfortunate incidents. 
I will not speak here about what occurred in Eastern Europe or in the Communist Bloc. 
But in this country and in countries like France and England, such cases have been a constant feature of the past 15 or 20 years.  
You may tell me that such things also happen in the private sector. 
Of course, but in this case it is everybody's money that is at stake, and not just private funds.  
That is why careful consideration must be given to this proposal for a new government structure. 
I am referring to the Investment Board.  
All the contributions will be invested by this so-called Investment Board. 
I would like to start by saying that in 10 years, we will have a government agency managing some $150 billion.  
Do you realize how much power these people will have? 
Every week, every Monday morning when these people arrive at work, they will find in front of them millions and millions of dollars that they will have to invest immediately. 
Three billion dollars is $3,000 million. 
Theoretically, this is $600 million a day. 
This has to be invested right away, it cannot wait until the afternoon.  
Do you think that the heavy machinery required for these operations will be efficient? 
Impossible, honourable senators. 
 As Senator Murray said , I know how pleased John M . must be to know that you , Sister Peggy , are replacing him as a senator from Cape .
 Murray must how Cape know know , M that John replacing Senator be said him . Breton pleased , from as to a As you senator are . I , Peggy
 must Peggy Senator Cape said pleased as , M from senator Sister you him John Murray are , . a , know replacing that Breton . how be I know As
 be as how replacing John from , M must As him know that Sister Breton are senator said Peggy . pleased know , to I you , Cape a Murray .
There is no doubt about that.  
 that no doubt . about There is
 that doubt There about no is .
 . is about doubt that There no
 is about doubt that There no .
 is . There that about no doubt
 . There no is about that doubt
 . about doubt is no that There
 about . doubt is There no that
 There . no about that is doubt
 There about that doubt no . is
 is no doubt . about There that
 doubt that . about no is There
 about is no doubt There . that
 . that is doubt There about no
 is that There doubt . about no
 is doubt that There no . about
Then the benefits were extended. 
The provision went from having to live together for seven years to share in CPP benefits - in other words, when one died the other one would pick up the cash - down to one year. 
If you lived together for one year, the other person was considered your husband or your wife, and benefits again were extended to the surviving spouse - another increased cost.  
Yesterday, Senator Kirby alluded to the possibility that there may be other social changes in those arrangements. 
I know what that means. 
It is possible that governments may recognize gay marriages, and I think he wanted to let us know that there may be these kinds of changes taking place. 
That is fine, if the government wants to do that. 
Now you have two guys living together; one dies, the other one is picking up some cash. 
That costs more money. 
Well, two guys who live together for one year may not be gay. 
How would you know?  
Senator Gigantès :
You want surveillance cameras?  
Senator Tkachuk :
So there is an opportunity for fraud. 
This is not a pension program. 
Let us make that clear. 
This is a payroll tax to pay Old Age Pensions, disability, life insurance, benefits to survivors, orphans, children, or exemptions for child rearing. 
We did not have that either, and there is nothing wrong with that. 
They decided that seven years of child rearing would make you part of the CPP labour force, and therefore you can get benefits. 
 There is no doubt that .
 . no that is doubt There
 . There no that doubt about
 . about no that is doubt
Well done thou good and faithful servant, John M. We all know that a place was reserved for you in heaven and we all know that you are watching over us from that place.  
 . good thou us Well that done was We and for John all know M in faithful reserved watching are over place that you that servant place know a you we . heaven from and all ,
 place reserved We you M watching Well we for are all in John that from . that thou place know us know that heaven over all faithful was a . , done good servant and you and
 place that . over and . thou done know , M you heaven are we all know was you us servant a reserved and faithful for Well in watching John from that We all good that place
 done was that a that are all for you John know M . in . over and that place us watching servant reserved know from and place , We thou all we you faithful heaven Well good
 , that that over M you place you done us John all know are thou and Well place we We know servant . watching for faithful a from and in all reserved . heaven that was good
 watching M and good over you that from John a Well that was thou . know heaven reserved that servant faithful We are all , in we place know . for and you done us all place
 from a that and , us watching heaven We Well place that that know we all are good you know faithful you M for and over was reserved John done all . in servant place thou .
 reserved are over you John We thou know watching that Well heaven and done know , for place was from that good M servant . us all in faithful you a that we and all place .
 Well from faithful John that know know that in all . done heaven you that place servant are good all place was for reserved , you watching us a over and thou M . We we and
 a know . you place thou . that for good was heaven all servant that us done you place from John we watching in faithful over and are all M and Well , reserved We that know
 know We and heaven that . us good watching . place over and that M you Well place thou for John you a , from know we was that in all servant faithful reserved are done all
 you over and know that M you a we We . that . Well are all for , thou from John place reserved heaven done all that watching place good us in servant and was know faithful
 M and that you . that that Well done a we place good for reserved John are in thou all watching We and over , . know place heaven servant know faithful was you us from all
 watching you reserved know John from M for . and we know that thou that place place We are over heaven done good you a servant was all faithful that in and , us Well . all
 that all John good place for us you from heaven over know thou and We , reserved done know watching Well that and was that . in we place . a faithful are servant all M you
 a faithful us for servant all . that done John that reserved watching over and M heaven was we place you place that know . We Well in good thou know and all are from , you
The total loss to the Atlantic provinces is $58 million.  
At the same time, three provinces, Ontario, Alberta and British Columbia will see their cash payments actually rise. 
Atlantic Canada's loss is their gain.  
Can the Leader of the Government tell us if his government believes that it is fair to ask the provinces that can least afford it to continue to receive less money year after year by way of support for health, education and social assistance?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
I thank the honourable Senator DeWare for doing the mathematics for me. 
I only wish I had done it myself prior to coming into the Senate today. 
I would be happy to investigate the reasons why those particular numbers appear in the manner in which she has presented them.  
Senator DeWare :
I appreciate that. 
It will not matter that we are less able to raise money than the so-called "have provinces."  
Honourable senators, because the population of the Atlantic provinces is not growing as fast as Ontario, Alberta or British Columbia, the smaller provinces will get less cash while the larger ones will get more. 
The $12.5 billion figure is prorated by provincial population.  
Will the government consider the way it calculates transfer payments to ensure that cash transfers to Atlantic Canada, Saskatchewan and Manitoba do not decline any further?  
Senator Graham :
I shall certainly bring those very legitimate concerns to the attention of the responsible minister.  
Environment 
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Support by Provinces of Government Position taken at Kyoto-Request for Particulars 
Hon. Mira Spivak :
Honourable senators, on December 1, the federal government proposed that Canada's position at the Kyoto meeting on global climate change would be that developed countries should target 2010 emissions that are 3 per cent below 1990 levels and that Canada should reach the 1990 levels by 2007.  
 Well done thou good and faithful servant , John M . We know that a place was reserved for you in heaven and we all know that you are watching over us from that place .
 you from all reserved and and place . Well that for heaven over M good all know we thou faithful We are know . servant done that watching place us , was John you in that
 all was Well all We are that thou . good know for done heaven John watching place , and over M reserved you a . from we you and faithful that servant us that in know
 John reserved know all you and place servant for good you are M and place we that know all from us a that Well , was thou . . done that faithful in watching over We
Hon. J. Michael Forrestall :
 J Hon Forrestall Michael . : .
 . J Forrestall : Hon . Michael
 Michael Forrestall Hon J . : .
 Hon J Forrestall . . : Michael
 . Hon : . Forrestall Michael J
 : Hon Michael . J Forrestall .
 Michael J . Forrestall : . Hon
 Michael Forrestall Hon . : . J
 J Michael . Forrestall : Hon .
 . Michael . Hon J Forrestall :
 J : Michael . . Hon Forrestall
 Forrestall : J . . Michael Hon
 . . Hon : Michael J Forrestall
 . Forrestall J Hon : . Michael
 : Forrestall . J Hon Michael .
 Hon J Forrestall Michael : . .
Is leave granted?  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
He just felt it was not necessary.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Leave is granted.  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is it your pleasure, honourable senators, to adopt the motion?  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
Motion agreed to.  
The Senate 
Conduct of Business-Notice of Inquiry 
Hon. William M. Kelly :
Honourable senators, I give notice: 
That on Thursday next, December 11, 1997, I will call the attention of the Senate to the way in which the Senate conducts its business.  
QUESTION PERIOD 
Federal-Provincial Relations 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Province of Quebec-Request for Particulars 
 Hon . . Michael Forrestall :
 . . : J Forrestall Hon
 Hon Forrestall J . . Michael
 Hon : . J Michael Forrestall
Honourable senators, I will be brief. 
 be will Honourable brief senators . , I
 senators Honourable brief will be , . I
 brief Honourable , senators be will I .
 brief will senators Honourable be , . I
 will . brief senators Honourable I , be
 be I brief senators , . Honourable will
 , be I senators Honourable will brief .
 I Honourable , . will brief be senators
 will senators be Honourable brief , . I
 senators be Honourable , . I brief will
 Honourable be I senators brief . , will
 Honourable brief , I . will senators be
 I , brief . senators will be Honourable
 senators will , . I be brief Honourable
 brief . be I senators , Honourable will
 I will senators , . brief Honourable be
I do not exclude however the idea that provincial politicians could bring pressure to bear on this organization so that, when investments are made, people from each region benefit. 
To what extent will ethics and conflict of interest rules be overlooked? 
My experience tells me and I can tell you that it is going to be complicated.  
Hon. Terry Stratton :
Honourable senators, I should like participate in the debate on Bill C-2, the Canada Pension Plan.  
They were informed; and they could understand the information they were being given.  
At the end of every television interview, the finance minister reiterated that, if they did not like the private sector pension plan, they could stick with the public sector pension plan. 
He did this all the way through, for months, until it came time for the people to decide which plan they wanted.  
Within the first six weeks, 25 per cent of the public were in the private pension plan. 
Today, 90 per cent of the public are in the private pension plan, and that plan is doing extremely well. 
Despite the crisis with the Mexican peso, which involves their next door neighbour, their equity market survived, and is, in fact, doing well. 
Investors are getting good returns.  
Two lessons are to be learned from that. 
First, a communication plan on the part of the government can sell a fund that is fundamentally sound; and, second, a private pension plan can work.  
Honourable senators, we will have a private pension plan in this country within 10 years, because those "generation X" kids will demand it from us. 
The "excess generation," as the article calls you and I, will have no say in the matter.  
My fundamental point is that there must be a communications plan.  
This bill is seen by many people across the country as nothing more than another tax grab by the Liberal government, a tax grab in the range of $100 billion. 
Imagine bringing in a bill of such magnitude without giving Canadians the opportunity to have input into such dramatic changes to their retirement system as we know it, changes which will dramatically change the three pillars of our pension system, OAS, GIS, and the Canada Pension Plan.  
As I noted in a question to the Leader of the Government in the Senate on October 30: 
 Honourable senators , will be brief .
 be Honourable brief , . I senators
 senators be brief , I Honourable will
 senators I will Honourable brief , .
What has been said about John M. is, of course, true. 
 about true of John , course What is has M said . . been ,
 . true has . about said of John is , , course M been What
 has course about What said . M John , , been . is of true
 is been . John has true course , What said M about of , .
 of John has . , been What said . , is about true course M
 been has John , course . said What , about true M . of is
 John What of M has course . , said true been , . about is
 . course of What , about . is has been M John said true ,
 about said true has . of course M been is John , , What .
 . true John , . is been course , has M of about What said
 course M , about true of . , What John has is been . said
 . , course M true What is about of has . John , been said
 John about is said M has . course of true What , , been .
 . , What has said true , been . M course of is John about
 true been , John of is What course about said . M . has ,
 . M has about is said , . true , course John been of What
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, I have a problem. 
Offhand, I do not know if you can amend a reasoned amendment. 
I must look at the precedents. 
Debate adjourned to await the ruling of the Speaker. 
Quebec 
Linguistic School Boards-Amendment to Section 93 of Constitution-Report of Special Joint Committee Adopted 
On the Order: 
Resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Pépin, seconded by the Honourable Senator Lucier, for the adoption of the Report of the Special Joint Committee to Amend Section 93 of the Constitution Act, 1867 concerning the Quebec School System, deposited with the Clerk of the Senate on November 7, 1997.  
Hon. John Lynch-Staunton (Leader of the Opposition) :
Honourable senators, I would like first of all to thank the co-chairmen of the joint committee, our colleague Senator Lucie Pépin, and the other co-chairman, MP Denis Paradis, for their excellent work in rather exceptional and sometimes trying circumstances.  
In fact, as has been said here and elsewhere, considering the decision of the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs that government support for the amendment to section 93 of the Constitution was already an established fact and that the government majority in committee left no doubt as to what conclusions it would reach, the committee's role could have been limited to that of a rubber stamp.  
Furthermore, the committee was not allowed to hold hearings outside Ottawa and was required to table its report no later than November 7, 1997, with only three weeks to hear witnesses and prepare its report. 
What a contrast with the extremely slow process followed by many less important bills that gather dust for months on parliamentary shelves before receiving Royal Assent.  
In his November 27, 1997 speech, Senator Wood gave a very good description of the strait-jacket in which the joint committee had to work. 
Everything was rushed. 
No announcements were made that hearings were being held, contrary to what is usually done. 
The list of witnesses changed almost from hour to hour. 
Some witnesses had only a few hours' notice that they would be appearing before the committee, and their presentations suffered as a result, as they said themselves.  
Under such conditions, it was quite normal that participation in the committee could have been interpreted as sanctioning the conditions imposed by and for the government. 
 What has been said about John M . , of course , true .
 true has said . What , . course John is about of , been
 , has . course been M of about said John . What is true
 of been M course . said has true about . What , John ,
So circumspect was he, indeed, that on the occasion of his ninetieth birthday he would not let anyone tell his staff because he felt that might lead to an invitation to them to come to Cape Breton. 
 anyone staff he of that Cape them felt on indeed might So not to . an because was to he would come let tell he his his invitation that ninetieth to circumspect , lead to occasion , the Breton birthday
 them circumspect invitation an to he birthday , Cape come the felt his of . that to anyone lead So not his would that tell indeed he might ninetieth , he to was to let staff on Breton occasion because
 . staff Breton come invitation might would them was tell his that , he , on the ninetieth to of not because So that occasion he felt his indeed lead to let an to Cape birthday to he circumspect anyone
 his indeed might not lead that occasion , anyone of ninetieth them let felt to So staff birthday invitation tell because an he to . come to he Cape to his the on that was he , Breton circumspect would
 invitation staff . of the , to felt he birthday ninetieth indeed that tell on them lead come would he he , circumspect his his Cape Breton occasion So because let to to an not anyone was to that might
 he indeed occasion his not birthday to he would might So to lead the his to Breton tell invitation , felt to that let on staff was , because he Cape . come an ninetieth anyone circumspect that them of
 the his , he to , lead let because Breton an on not tell indeed birthday that to ninetieth Cape felt to anyone he to his occasion invitation So them staff of he would was might come circumspect . that
 to he to the So felt birthday , of that staff invitation circumspect on to lead Breton might to not come indeed tell because them let his occasion his he an anyone that would Cape , was . ninetieth he
 So , indeed to to to of that birthday , because staff anyone was he felt invitation come Breton occasion might ninetieth an on . circumspect that to them not Cape his would his lead he let the tell he
 indeed his to the circumspect occasion Cape , of he was to because lead invitation come not Breton to felt would he his might that to . them on birthday , anyone that So let tell he staff ninetieth an
 come of indeed to Breton ninetieth on he was Cape , to them might his So because invitation circumspect . the staff that not to lead anyone occasion tell let , to his felt he that would an he birthday
 of on Breton might , to tell them he anyone ninetieth Cape was let birthday his staff felt lead an indeed because So circumspect not to that . , would that to the his he occasion to come invitation he
 to tell would let staff was to Breton occasion because to on his that might an indeed he his that of invitation he . , Cape come not anyone birthday lead circumspect the , So them ninetieth felt to he
 birthday staff lead to was to invitation felt an Cape . not them that anyone his ninetieth let circumspect the to to tell So would of that indeed because he occasion he his might on , Breton , he come
 . to that ninetieth he invitation to let to would birthday was anyone on the felt not might occasion to So his , circumspect indeed that lead he because staff Cape of an tell come he his Breton them ,
 let Breton that . , the his So anyone would because that an to ninetieth birthday his lead to , he tell of staff to he come circumspect not might occasion them he Cape was felt to invitation indeed on
Sometimes even two, three or four committees are sitting when we are sitting. 
That is an improper practice.  
If the deputy leader could guarantee to us that, on Wednesdays from now on - and we will strive to be cooperative - we will sit no later than 3:30 p.m., unless there is a proven urgency, then I think Senator Stewart's motion is in order. 
However, we need that assurance first.  
Senator Carstairs :
Let me assure the Leader and Deputy Leader of the Opposition that we will do everything on our part to ensure that sessions end on time. 
We did sit yesterday, which was a Monday. 
I can assure senators we will be sitting next Monday in order to fulfil the business of the chamber before the Christmas break.  
Senator Kinsella :
On that basis, I do not think leave is necessary.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is leave granted?  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
He just felt it was not necessary.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Leave is granted.  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is it your pleasure, honourable senators, to adopt the motion?  
 So circumspect was he , indeed that on the occasion of his ninetieth birthday he would not let anyone tell his staff because he felt that might lead to an invitation to them to come to Cape Breton .
 he to he staff birthday ninetieth of invitation because felt Breton Cape would to let indeed an his tell come anyone on not that . he , the to circumspect might that occasion his to lead was , them
 not of , he So that ninetieth anyone Cape circumspect the tell felt . his because let staff on might , an come he to was to he lead Breton would his to to indeed them invitation occasion that
 staff . to , he his circumspect Cape he not them indeed let of would might an on occasion , to Breton that lead was his that felt he ninetieth the So birthday invitation tell come to because to
He said, "What would the people of Cape Breton think if I showed up with a woman on my arm?"  
 I up arm a on my would Breton if think Cape people of What , ?" He " showed the said woman with
 arm if my of I people think up woman What on Breton , would the He a showed " said with Cape ?"
 I think woman my with on a , ?" people would showed if He Breton Cape the arm " said What up of
 ?" if He Breton , woman " with think of a Cape arm would up on said What the people I my showed
 What think woman , people if on He with up Cape Breton the my ?" a said of would arm I showed "
 , of I He my arm said the people Breton showed Cape think with if " What on woman a ?" would up
 on Cape showed people with a Breton the if my ?" said " What He , woman up I would think of arm
 would woman a , people my arm Cape up of ?" Breton on think He I with showed What if the said "
 with I people the showed woman of Cape said my on , a arm Breton ?" up if " He What think would
 up What if said people arm Cape Breton with I would He a " showed think , the of woman my on ?"
 I up woman ?" would people arm showed What the Breton , " think if of He on my Cape with a said
 He on showed a with up said think woman , ?" Breton of Cape if the my arm I What would " people
 Cape would with up on a woman arm " I the if He ?" , showed my said think people Breton of What
 think the ?" a What if woman arm Cape would said I my on of showed people with " , up Breton He
 " think , What a showed arm with on people woman Breton the ?" Cape of my would if up I He said
 a if the woman on arm He Breton ?" think , up would What of my said I showed " with people Cape
Senator Chalifoux :
I am asking you.  
Senator Stratton :
First, because of the $600-billion debt that the pension plan has, I do not think that we can privatize it at this time. 
I do not think the people the honourable senator talked about, and the people of my generation, are prepared enough financially to make that transition. 
You cannot do that immediately. 
One needs only consider the situation of Chile. 
Chile is a long, skinny country on the west coast of South America, and I really do believe they have a communications problem there as severe as ours. 
I told honourable senators the story of the finance minister in Chile, going on television every three weeks to a month, and breaking down the new plan into segments, talking to the people, because they all have television, and communicating in that fashion. 
That was the government's way of dealing with it in Chile. 
The only way to communicate is eyeball to eyeball. 
You have to get out and talk to people in their backyards. 
There is no great hurry for this bill to get through, at least not to the degree that you could not do that. 
Why not insist that your government take our committee out there to talk to your people?  
Senator Chalifoux :
We talked to the Conservative government about that for many years and nothing was done.  
Senator Comeau :
We are not in power now. 
You should push your people.  
On motion of Senator Gigantès, debate adjourned.  
 He said , " What would the people of Breton think if I showed up with a woman on my arm ?"
 arm I ?" He a said of with people What , if think showed woman Cape the on my " up would
 Breton He of up ?" I said , showed would people my think with on Cape if arm woman " the a
 think Cape Breton a people the said showed woman What would with of , my up He on ?" if arm "
He had that sense of humour, that sense of correctness, that sense of giving without looking down. 
 looking without had He . that correctness that , , giving sense of of that sense of sense down humour
 giving , sense that , had of sense of down humour sense that . of correctness that without He looking
 of correctness that , down sense sense giving , looking of of that sense . without He humour had that
 that He correctness of had sense , , giving down of sense sense that looking without that . of humour
 that of that down had that correctness of sense humour looking giving , sense , He of sense . without
 giving that humour of that without He sense . that , sense of of sense correctness looking down had ,
 of of looking sense had . , giving correctness that of He that sense humour down that , without sense
 that giving of had sense of that sense . humour , of down without , that correctness sense He looking
 sense sense giving , without sense of , looking that of down that had He correctness that humour of .
 , . that of sense that had , correctness down sense He that of humour sense without giving looking of
 of of correctness humour down looking sense that had He of that without , that sense sense . giving ,
 giving that of , sense that that without sense had humour sense of . He correctness of down looking ,
 that . correctness had of of down humour , sense that of giving sense that looking , without He sense
 . giving of down that that of , sense He humour looking of that without sense sense correctness , had
 giving of humour sense sense of , correctness sense that had down of that looking . , without He that
 , He giving that had of down of of that without humour . that correctness sense looking sense , sense
Senator Gigantès :
You want surveillance cameras?  
Senator Tkachuk :
So there is an opportunity for fraud. 
This is not a pension program. 
Let us make that clear. 
This is a payroll tax to pay Old Age Pensions, disability, life insurance, benefits to survivors, orphans, children, or exemptions for child rearing. 
We did not have that either, and there is nothing wrong with that. 
They decided that seven years of child rearing would make you part of the CPP labour force, and therefore you can get benefits. 
That is a social program; a good social program, but it is coming out of the pension fund.  
We have spent all this cash over the last 30 years and we say now, "Oh, it is not our fault. 
It is not legislators' fault. 
Senator Gigantès :
Are you quoting the Reform Party?  
Senator Tkachuk :
I do not think so, although I have a few things to say about Reform here too, which I will get to right away.  
I would like to quote Preston Manning's comments from Tuesday, October 28, in committee. 
These are the other guys in the other place. 
He was speaking of Martin and Pettigrew.  
The alternative we would like the committee to consider rests on four pillars rather than three: the seniors benefit, which is targeted to lower-income people; a smaller, more focused CPP, not a scrapped CPP; 
 He had that sense of humour , that sense of correctness , that sense of without looking down .
 of that of had correctness down giving humour that looking , He without . sense of sense sense ,
 had that that . sense of sense humour , , of of down looking sense correctness giving He that
 down of . sense sense had correctness of , without that giving He looking sense , humour of that
He made us all feel a little bigger and a little better. 
 a a all bigger feel He little us . and better made little
 little us made all little better a . and feel He a bigger
 better feel little made . and a bigger He all us little a
 all little He and . a little us feel made better a bigger
 a bigger little better . little He and all a us feel made
 little bigger us He little better feel and . made a all a
 . made and all little He feel a us a little better bigger
 a little feel made a He bigger all and . better little us
 us all a little and a bigger . He better made feel little
 us He better and . bigger little all little made feel a a
 . He a and better a bigger all little little us feel made
 better all a made little a and feel little He bigger . us
 and . little all made bigger a He us little feel better a
 us a and all a bigger little He little made . better feel
 He us a feel all a made and . better little bigger little
 . bigger little little all us better made a and a He feel
In other words, it is and will be perceived as another tax.  
On November 5, Senator Oliver said: 
They are increasing it by one month per year to give people time to adjust to the new reality of that retirement age. 
In effect, that will keep things in relative control.  
It should have been explained to Canadians that the government explored that method and rejected it for specific reasons. 
As others have said before me, people are living longer. 
While the age of 65 was formerly not achieved by many, it is being achieved by most today. 
That should be taken into consideration as a basis for increasing the age for retirement because it will decrease the burden on the young people who today believe that they will have to pay the whole shot for us.  
Senator Oliver continued: 
Honourable senators, in these times of slowing real incomes, increasing long-term interest rates, high personal taxes, increased CPP premiums, and ridiculously high EI premiums, where does the Leader of the Government believe that Canadians, who will receive less money from public plans, will find money to put away in their RRSPs to secure their own retirements?  
On November 6, Senator Oliver asked: 
Honourable senators, in 1995, the Department of Finance conducted a study on the impact of the increase in CPP premiums between 1986 and 1995. 
During that period, employee contributions rose from 1.85 per cent to 2.25 per cent of earnings, and the combined rate rose from 3.6 to 5 per cent.  
How many Canadians must pay the price for the planned increase in premiums?  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, I regret to interrupt the honourable senator, but his allotted time has expired.  
Senator Stratton :
I would like to finish my speech, if I may.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is leave granted for Honourable Senator Stratton to continue?  
 He made us feel a little bigger and a little better .
 little and made feel a He . a bigger all little better
 made He better little feel and bigger a all . little a
 a little He . little bigger better and a all us made
I had known him, like Senator Buchanan and Senator Graham, since the mid-1950s when I first became associated with Bob Stanfield.  
 Senator known since and I Graham Bob when with mid became the first him had I like Senator , associated Buchanan . Stanfield , - 1950s
 Stanfield and - like I Senator had associated , the known I Buchanan 1950s first him Senator . Bob when with since Graham mid , became
 , first with . Buchanan since Bob - like I the Senator , 1950s him known Stanfield Graham I when Senator became mid and had associated
 - with and associated like since mid the Buchanan first Senator , . , I when Stanfield Graham I 1950s him Senator had Bob known became
 I like Senator , became him I when with and since Senator . Graham associated known Bob had mid the Stanfield Buchanan - first 1950s ,
 first Stanfield the mid him Graham , - and I . Buchanan like with Bob associated , since Senator known I became Senator had 1950s when
 him . the Stanfield associated since I known Senator like first when Bob Graham I 1950s Senator with Buchanan - became , had mid , and
 , 1950s and with when the Stanfield Senator like Bob associated , had - since known Buchanan him I mid first became Senator I . Graham
 when Stanfield I 1950s . like had Senator associated since - became the , with , and I Bob Buchanan Graham Senator first known mid him
 him when Buchanan and I . since Senator like I 1950s known with Senator Graham the Bob associated , - , first had became Stanfield mid
 known him I , first became since the Graham with like mid - Senator when Buchanan Stanfield Senator . associated I had , and Bob 1950s
 Stanfield Graham , had first - him the known became Senator . and I I Senator with mid associated when since like , 1950s Buchanan Bob
 mid the first became . associated known and Bob Buchanan like , 1950s - when Stanfield had him since Senator with Senator Graham I I ,
 1950s first became - Buchanan Graham , the I him and . like Bob Stanfield with , Senator when mid I since associated known had Senator
 Senator I like him since . the became Buchanan I Graham Stanfield known , and had mid Senator associated first with , when - Bob 1950s
 with Graham Senator Buchanan first like mid I - and became the associated when Stanfield had I . Bob , Senator , since him known 1950s
Unfortunately, there was not enough time to involve the committee in preparatory briefings in order for it to have as complete an appreciation and understanding as possible of all the implications of Quebec's resolution. 
As a result, it tended to stray from the substance of the reference before it. 
"Religious education," "religious instruction," "denominational schools," "confessional schools," "linguistic rights," "minority rights" and other terms were used so often that they tended to become interchangeable to the point that they occasionally melded together.  
Section 93 was a result of a compromise at a time when two religious beliefs dominated everyday life in Canada to an extent hard to describe today when even one's most difficult moral decisions are usually self-determined, rather than imposed without question by a recognized higher authority. 
In 1867, Catholics and Protestants were guaranteed certain privileges which were not even considered for other religious denominations. 
Their numbers and influences were such that the idea that a section 93 was nothing else but a deserved right did not even arise.  
In the early 1980s, when a Canadian constitution was being debated, section 93 remained as it was written in 1867, despite the fact that Canadian society had evolved to the point where the debate we are now having should have been held then. 
Even more to the point, the authors of the Constitution Act recognized that section 93's limitations to two privileged Christian beliefs would conflict with the Charter's anti-discrimination implications, so much so that section 93 was provided immunity from the Charter in section 29. 
Indeed, section 29 could not be clearer. 
It reads as follows: 
Nothing in this Charter abrogates or derogates from any rights or privileges guaranteed by or under the Constitution of Canada in respect of denominational, separate or dissentient schools.  
Why the issue of confessional schools as well as other issues crying out for change, such as Senate reform, were left untouched during the long debate before and during patriation and surrounding the Constitution Act itself is for those who were there at the time to explain. 
Certainly a golden opportunity was lost to give Canada a basic law more in tune with modern Canadian society, except for the adoption of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 
Even it is not without its flaws, not the least being the notwithstanding clause which can be subjected to abuse. 
Perhaps all of this is a reflection of the one constant which has marked Canada since its origins, a country identified by its extraordinary political and social diversity and contradictions.  
In any event, we are faced with a request from the Quebec National Assembly to be removed from the obligations to maintain formal Catholic and Protestant school structures in the cities of Montreal and Quebec City and to maintain minority or dissentient Catholic and Protestant schools outside those areas at the request of minority Catholic or Protestant parents, as the case may be. 
Provincial legislation to establish linguistic schools is already being put into effect. 
These can be established without amending section 93. 
Quebec, however, points out that to have multiple school systems can only lead to overlapping, duplication, and confusion, with all their attendant additional costs.  
In addition, religious education as provided for in section 93 is reconfirmed in the province's Education Act, which by itself may be reassuring at first glance, but not in reality as it is a protection which is simply not as iron-clad as a constitutional guarantee.  
 I had known him , like Senator and Senator Graham , since the mid - 1950s when I first became associated with Bob Stanfield .
 , when and Senator him like Bob Buchanan Stanfield mid I since with , - associated first Graham 1950s the known became I Senator had
 1950s I Graham since mid known when Stanfield I , with Buchanan him , Senator Bob Senator and like - became first . had the
 since mid like became with Graham I and Bob . Buchanan had Senator , - him I , Senator when known Stanfield associated the 1950s
John M. left a legacy that will not early or easily be forgotten. 
 . be forgotten left not a will early legacy or . easily John that M
 forgotten early that be or left legacy . M easily John . will a not
 a easily John early that or not be . . forgotten M will left legacy
 be a not that early M easily . legacy or forgotten John will . left
 a John . easily left be not that M forgotten legacy early or . will
 forgotten easily . not early left will M John or that . a legacy be
 will easily forgotten not early a . or that John M . legacy be left
 legacy or left easily M not John a will forgotten . be that . early
 not be . M legacy . or easily early forgotten that a left will John
 left easily not that John . forgotten legacy or be will early M . a
 . that early forgotten a M will or easily legacy John be . left not
 . forgotten left easily . John legacy early or will a that be M not
 forgotten left legacy or . not that John easily . M early a be will
 . will early John . legacy easily left not M that be a or forgotten
 will . be that not forgotten . John left M easily a legacy or early
 be not . legacy or that a will forgotten left M early John . easily
The Hon. the Speaker :
It was moved by the Honourable Senator Pépin, seconded by the Honourable Senator Lucier, that this report be adopted.  
Is it your pleasure, honourable senators, to adopt the motion?  
Motion agreed to and report adopted, on division.  
Quebec 
Linguistic School Boards-Motion to Amend Section 93 of Constitution-Debate Adjourned 
Hon. Fernand Robichaud , for Senator Graham, rose pursuant to notice of Thursday, October 2, 1997: 
Whereas the Government of Quebec has indicated that it intends to establish French and English linguistic school boards in Quebec; 
and whereas the National Assembly of Quebec has passed a resolution authorizing an amendment to the Constitution of Canada; 
and whereas the National Assembly of Quebec has reaffirmed the established rights of the English-speaking community of Quebec, specifically the right, in accordance with the law of Quebec, of members of that community to have their children receive their instruction in English language educational facilities that are under the management and control of that community and are financed through public funds; 
and whereas section 23 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms guarantees to citizens throughout Canada rights to minority language instruction and minority language educational facilities under the management and control of linguistic minorities and provided out of public funds; 
and whereas section 43 of the Constitution Act, 1982 provides that an amendment to the Constitution of Canada may be made by proclamation issued by the Governor General under the Great Seal of Canada where so authorized by resolutions of the Senate and House of Commons and of the legislative assembly of each province to which the amendment applies; 
now therefore the Senate resolves that an amendment to the Constitution of Canada be authorized to be made by proclamation issued by His Excellency the Governor General under the Great Seal of Canada in accordance with the schedule hereto.  
SCHEDULE 
AMENDMENT TO THE CONSTITUTION OF CANADA 
CONSTITUTION ACT, 1867 
The Constitution Act, 1867, is amended by adding, immediately after section 93, the following: 
"93A. 
Paragraphs (1) to (4) of section 93 do not apply to Quebec." 
CITATION 
 John . left a legacy that will not early or easily be forgotten .
 not easily . be a forgotten legacy John . early that M left or
 be . legacy or . a early forgotten not M John will easily left
 forgotten easily . M or early . that a not John be legacy left
I have known no man, or very few, who, in such a distinguished but quiet way, had such a great influence on so many individuals. 
 , , individuals way very but many great in few no a , had such quiet influence so who distinguished I such . man , have on or known a
 who very quiet influence but a great individuals few so distinguished in have a . , , on known I , way had such many , such man no or
 distinguished such so but , , I , man such known quiet . who in have great had on a influence no few , individuals many a very or way
 on had who a influence a such great so in . known distinguished , few but or way no very man , many quiet have I , such individuals ,
 so man such distinguished individuals who no quiet or a influence , a , in I such on but . , few many great known have had , way very
 very in had , have I or but a distinguished way so quiet many . no on few known great such such influence , , who individuals , man a
 known few such , have so man way , , I or had a no . in but distinguished such great very a who on many , individuals quiet influence
 a , known quiet individuals I no who such way very influence in , a , or . few on distinguished man so great but such have had many ,
 a on great no who , , way or so . many I known , influence quiet man very such had in but individuals such few , a distinguished have
 on or , distinguished had man so . way in , few great who influence individuals have very known I but a such many quiet , a such , no
 , who . such I man no on very distinguished few but a many a , influence quiet or such way in , individuals had known so have , great
 , few in , no very man . who on , , had have a individuals so way quiet such or great distinguished known influence many but I a such
 , I or but so influence no have few man , , had who in a very such . a way distinguished on , known quiet such great many individuals
 but very distinguished no , many in or have known , . such man a , who influence I way quiet had individuals on great , such so a few
 have few in had quiet no such many , , who known such very a great , so man or influence individuals , . I on a way but distinguished
 many way on distinguished few no individuals have a , . in who man , a such great quiet had or , influence but known I very so such ,
I would like to know what his position is on the working poor and on part-time workers. 
In this country, there are more part-time workers and more working poor than there are people who identify as middle class. 
What is the honourable senator's opinion on that?  
In this country, we have a totally isolated segment of society which is called "the mid-Canada corridor." 
Even in terms of communications, there is very little. 
What would the honourable senator do in the area of communication for those in isolated settlements regarding private pension plans? 
There are no words in Cree or michif for "private pension plan."  
I was a member of the working poor in 1965 and 1966 when this plan was put into force. 
I did not agree with the Canada Pension Plan. 
However, I will guarantee honourable senators right now that I totally agree with deductions being made, because now at least I have a pension.  
What will happen if this plan goes through is that the people in this country who really need it will get it. 
They have to travel 240 kilometres to the closest bank. 
Many do not speak English. 
What would you do in this case for these people who have nothing?  
Some Hon. Senators :
Hear, hear!  
Senator Stratton :
I thank the honourable senator for her question. 
It was an excellent question, and it is one that she should ask of the government. 
She should ask the government what they are doing to communicate the changes to our pension plan system as a whole.  
 I have known no man , or very few , who in such a distinguished but quiet way , had such a great influence on so many individuals .
 or but I so , such who such a had . great way , , , influence on a have distinguished few individuals no very many known quiet man
 no distinguished few quiet a , way individuals man such such , I . known who influence in had a have , great but or many , so on
 . great very , known many few a such no , , I influence so on such but individuals had a in who man way , have quiet or
John M. Macdonald influenced people to goodness. 
 . to influenced people goodness M Macdonald John .
 . to John . M goodness influenced people Macdonald
 goodness M . influenced people Macdonald to John .
 people . influenced to John . Macdonald M goodness
 goodness John . to M people Macdonald . influenced
 people . goodness Macdonald . John to influenced M
 Macdonald . goodness influenced John M people . to
 Macdonald . people goodness John to M . influenced
 goodness John influenced . M . Macdonald people to
 Macdonald goodness people M influenced . to John .
 goodness M to people John Macdonald influenced . .
 people Macdonald goodness influenced M . . to John
 people Macdonald to M . John influenced . goodness
 John to . . goodness Macdonald M people influenced
 . influenced to Macdonald people John M goodness .
 M John . to . Macdonald influenced goodness people
When shall this bill be read the second time?  
On motion of Senator Carstairs, bill placed on Orders of the Day for second reading on Thursday next, December 11, 1997.  
Bill to Amend-Second Reading-Motions in Amendment-Debate Adjourned to Await Ruling of Speaker 
On the Order: 
Resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Moore, seconded by the Honourable Senator Ferretti Barth, for the second reading of Bill C-16, An Act to amend the Criminal Code and the interpretation Act (powers to arrest and enter dwellings), 
And on the motion in amendment of the Honourable Senator Cools, seconded by the Honourable Senator Sparrow, that the motion be amended by deleting all the words after "That" and substituting the following therefor: 
"Bill C-16, An Act to amend the Criminal Code and the Interpretation Act (powers to arrest and enter dwellings), be not now read a second time because 
( a ) the Senate is opposed to the principle of a bill which has been placed before Parliament as a result of the judgment of the Supreme Court of Canada of May 22, 1997, and of the Court's Orders of June 27 and November 19, 1997; 
( b ) the Senate finds it repugnant that the Supreme Court is infringing on the sovereign rights of Parliament to enact legislation and is failing to respect the constitutional comity between the courts and Parliament; and 
( c ) the Court is in effect coercing Parliament by threatening chaotic consequences respecting law enforcement and arrests if Parliament does not pass this bill."  
Hon. Orville H. Phillips :
Honourable senators, I had adjourned the debate but I understand Senator Wood wishes to speak.  
Hon. Dalia Wood :
Honourable senators, I rise to speak in support of Senator Cools's amendment. 
The amendment, described as a reasoned amendment, is a parliamentary device which allows a member to raise concerns and opposition to the principles of a bill. 
The public's emerging concern with judicial activism, particularly in the area of criminal law, is compelling our interest and study. 
An example of this concern may be found in a December letter to The Ottawa Citizen . 
We should be mindful of these growing questions and concerns.  
I commend Senator Cools for bringing this amendment forward at this time. 
She often acts as our conscience, and I, for one, would like to thank her for all the hard work she puts into researching the bills that come before us.  
 M . Macdonald influenced people to goodness .
 . influenced Macdonald goodness . to John people
 . Macdonald goodness people . to M influenced
 to Macdonald . people influenced . goodness M
He influenced them to care and concern for their fellow beings.  
 to He their influenced . them concern for beings fellow and care
 concern care them influenced and He their fellow to for beings .
 to care for concern . fellow He their influenced beings them and
 care to . He their beings fellow and concern influenced them for
 He beings and their care concern them to fellow for . influenced
 care to beings . and He influenced concern their fellow them for
 . beings influenced them to fellow their for He concern care and
 influenced concern He for them to fellow beings and care their .
 concern and influenced their to beings them care . fellow He for
 He care fellow to beings them their and concern influenced for .
 He beings . to care and influenced concern them their for fellow
 them for influenced their and fellow beings concern care . He to
 them concern He and care beings to . fellow influenced for their
 . for He them care influenced to their beings concern and fellow
 for beings concern fellow to care them . their He and influenced
 concern care to beings . and for fellow He influenced their them
Where are the big advertising programs of the Government of Canada which they mount when they really want to advertise something? 
This is a government program they do not want to advertise. 
They want it to slip in, just like this bill, so that people will not know and will not make the proper financial decisions, but instead will be exposed to a huge tax load for the year 1997. 
That is what Paul Martin wants, so that in February he can brag in his budget speech about how he has cleaned up the deficit - on the backs of the unemployed, on the backs of senior citizens, and on the backs of young people who will be paying the $400 million to the new pension plan.  
Senator Gigantès :
That is because over nine years you did nothing to address the deficit.  
Senator Tkachuk :
That is not true.  
The only reason the federal government is dealing with the situation now is that the minister of finance at the time, Michael Wilson, obtained an agreement that created a certain situation. 
There is a word in law for something from which one cannot extricate oneself, and where a decision must be made. 
That is why they have an agreement today. 
We tried to get it done in 1986.  
Senator Gigantès :
And you failed. 
You could not do it.  
Senator Tkachuk :
Because the Liberals would not agree. 
I will defend my government, and my honourable friend will defend his.  
I will not delve too far into the OAS because there are other speakers who wish to deal with this issue over the next two weeks. 
Perhaps we, as senators, will be able to discuss this matter well into the new year, which I hope we do.  
 He influenced them to care and for their fellow beings .
 and . influenced He them fellow to for beings their concern
 their beings He . influenced fellow and for care concern them
 care beings for and to concern . them fellow influenced their
Alas, John M.'s eyesight was failing quite badly and he never really did see the bust. 
 and M was , eyesight he Alas really John .' . failing did quite see never badly bust s the
 . bust eyesight John .' the never , did Alas was M see really s he badly quite and failing
 see M eyesight did badly and John .' really s never the quite bust Alas was failing , . he
 , .' he s did never quite M . really the eyesight badly and bust see Alas failing was John
 and he failing bust badly .' John never really Alas was eyesight s , see . the did quite M
 badly failing really Alas did quite . eyesight and see s .' was John M he never the bust ,
 John badly bust was the really quite . failing eyesight and s M Alas he , .' see never did
 Alas the badly did eyesight see , John quite M bust failing .' never s he and really was .
 he see did quite Alas never , s really badly John failing bust and was the eyesight . M .'
 was really and eyesight did Alas bust . John the quite s , see never .' badly failing M he
 never Alas M and really bust see .' s John was . the badly failing quite , he did eyesight
 he M . see quite did Alas John s the eyesight badly , really was failing bust .' never and
 quite and John really eyesight the see bust never failing did M , was s .' he . Alas badly
 quite see and Alas s John M never did .' failing eyesight , . bust the was really he badly
 the eyesight Alas John quite did was bust see really , . he badly s and never M failing .'
 . the s he never eyesight see Alas John .' and quite , badly was bust failing did really M
However, I wanted to make this correction, because you referred to the "government in place", when in fact it was the Liberal government of the day that made the decision, over the objections of the Parti Québécois then in opposition.  
I am asking you the same question I asked Senator Grafstein, but to which I did not get an answer. 
Why is it so important to exempt Quebec from section 93 to allow it to reform its school system? 
What is the connection between the two?  
Senator Robichaud :
Let me give you my version of the facts. 
When we heard witnesses from Quebec, including school board officials, parents and teachers, some of them told us that, in its present form, section 93 brings about a superimposition of structures, particularly in the Montreal region. 
These people told us that this was preventing authorities from providing the best possible services. 
These people also told us they wanted the resolution to be passed before the end of the year so they could start long-term planning. 
They would really appreciate having some time to implement these changes.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
I do not want to unduly prolong the debate, but I have another question for Senator Robichaud. 
Since we did not get answers to certain questions, would you agree to invite the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs, who is the sponsor of this resolution, to appear before the Senate in committee of the whole? 
We would like him to give us certain assurances before we make a decision on this issue?  
Senator Robichaud :
Honourable senators, the minister who is the sponsor of the resolution has already appeared before the joint committee. 
He came at the beginning and at the end of the hearings, and my honourable colleague was there to ask him questions on the issues that were of concern to him.  
If the honourable senator did not get answers to all his questions, that is an entirely different matter. 
On motion of Senator Kinsella, for Senator Simard, debate adjourned.  
Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration 
 Alas , M .' s eyesight was failing quite badly and he never really did see the bust .
 bust . he badly the Alas .' eyesight was , John failing M quite s never see really and
 , M bust did failing never and . badly he was eyesight see .' s quite Alas the really
 bust the really s quite , did he .' John . eyesight badly and never was M see Alas
He felt it and he knew what it was, of course.  
 it . felt was knew , of he what it He course and
 knew , of course He he what was it and . it felt
 course knew it . , of was it felt and He what he
 and was . course it felt knew he it , of He what
 it was and it . he felt knew , He course of what
 , and . He he it of felt it course was what knew
 felt course He what of was , and it knew . it he
 He of knew . was felt , and course he what it it
 felt , it knew . it he and of course was He what
 it course , it and what of knew he felt . was He
 of he , He it . and felt was course knew what it
 it knew he , course of it what felt He . and was
 He felt it . of course knew was what , it he and
 , He it knew what it . of was he and felt course
 course knew of it He it he what was felt and . ,
 he and , . course what felt knew was He of it it
With that level of cooperation, perhaps at some time in the future we can invoke a more formal process whereby there will be some guarantee to committee chairs.  
Barring that formal process, Senator Stewart has witnesses to hear from tomorrow, and I should like him to have permission to hear those witnesses tomorrow.  
Hon. John Lynch-Staunton (Leader of the Opposition) :
That worked for a while. 
Now we have forgotten Mondays, but we have continued on with the practice of having early sittings on Wednesdays. 
As a result, Wednesday has become a normal working session, going on until five or six o'clock. 
The whole purpose of starting the session at 1:30 p.m. has been defeated.  
I do not think it is correct, unless there is an urgency, for committees to sit at the same time as the chamber. 
This is not for appearances' sake, but because the work done here can often be as important in the debates as what goes on in committees. 
At various stages of our work - the introduction of bills, second reading, committee referral, then third reading - we are often doing several at the same time. 
Sometimes even two, three or four committees are sitting when we are sitting. 
That is an improper practice.  
If the deputy leader could guarantee to us that, on Wednesdays from now on - and we will strive to be cooperative - we will sit no later than 3:30 p.m., unless there is a proven urgency, then I think Senator Stewart's motion is in order. 
However, we need that assurance first.  
Senator Carstairs :
Let me assure the Leader and Deputy Leader of the Opposition that we will do everything on our part to ensure that sessions end on time. 
We did sit yesterday, which was a Monday. 
I can assure senators we will be sitting next Monday in order to fulfil the business of the chamber before the Christmas break.  
Senator Kinsella :
On that basis, I do not think leave is necessary.  
 He felt it and knew what it was , of course .
 felt it knew and it He was of , course what .
 of knew it . and He it , he what felt was
 course of He . knew , felt it it and was what
As Senator Buchanan has said, his eyesight did come back to some degree in the last week or ten days. 
 As . back eyesight the or ten Buchanan Senator days has to some week in , degree his come said last did
 eyesight did As Buchanan week or last come to degree his back has the some in . Senator said ten , days
 back or degree eyesight ten As week the Buchanan to come in said Senator his did last days some . has ,
 ten did degree in days week . come the said some to As last or Senator his back Buchanan , eyesight has
 his . last did back week said ten , some As has degree eyesight come days to Buchanan or Senator in the
 the has eyesight come in As back days said or some , ten last degree Buchanan . week did Senator his to
 . days the to week has Buchanan or last degree said did some come , ten Senator eyesight in As back his
 back Buchanan his eyesight days As degree some come in or did said has Senator the week . ten to last ,
 said his in Senator come has some degree week Buchanan ten to . the back As did , last days or eyesight
 come did the has his week , days some in to ten . eyesight degree Buchanan Senator As last back or said
 last the did has or come . week eyesight degree , to Senator days ten some said As in his back Buchanan
 back in Buchanan degree his eyesight did come to has some , days the . Senator ten As said week last or
 Buchanan last in days did said , . As to the ten degree back come week some eyesight his has Senator or
 the said to , Buchanan As come some last back his Senator ten . has degree eyesight week did in days or
 last . days As or his ten eyesight week come said Buchanan back some in , to degree the Senator has did
 week last come ten days or Buchanan did to the . some has in degree said his eyesight As Senator back ,
Agreed.  
Senator Grafstein :
Alliance Quebec, the foremost, mainstream English group, appeared at first to oppose section 93. 
However, on cross examination - and this is the value of the committee hearings - their interest was not so much in opposing section 93. 
Rather, their interest was focused on the failure of section 23(1)( a ) of the Charter to be proclaimed in Quebec. 
As Senator Lynch-Staunton put it so well, it means that there are in effect two classes in Quebec as it presently pertains. 
If you are English speaking and you come from outside of Canada, your children will be streamed by the Quebec government into the French-language stream. 
That is unfair. 
They are not without some type of relief and I will address that later.  
However, this is an issue of linguistic rights. 
Here the question is not of linguistic rights but denominational privileges.  
In cross-examining Alliance Quebec, it was clear that they did not oppose the amendments to section 93 but rather the enforcement of section 23(1)( a ). Section 23(1)( a ) requires a proclamation by the Province of Quebec, and a declaration of this proclamation is, of course, not within federal powers. 
We gave that up in 1982.  
Senator Pitfield knows this well. 
He was an architect of the Constitution Act, 1982. 
It is clearly within the four corners of the assembly of Quebec to proclaim, if it chooses, section 23(1)( a ). Many of us are unhappy with this aspect of section 23(1)( a ). Students in over 13,000 families have been precluded from entering the English stream because the Province of Quebec has refused to proclaim section 23(1)( a ). 
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Who put it in?  
Senator Grafstein :
Rather, they wished to use this opportunity to leverage the Government of Quebec to proclaim section 23(1)( a ). This the Quebec government was clearly not prepared to do.  
 As Senator Buchanan has said , his eyesight did come back to some degree in the last week or ten days
 eyesight to degree or the ten in back come As week did has , Senator said days . Buchanan some last
 As Senator Buchanan in week eyesight come last , did days the degree some . said to or ten back has
 his back some the said eyesight week come to As ten Buchanan did days Senator degree , last has . or
The staff of our chamber colleagues had a photograph of that bust taken and enlarged to quite a good size. 
 size taken chamber enlarged had our of that to colleagues bust of quite The photograph a and staff . a good
 of . photograph chamber The a and colleagues to size bust had our quite enlarged good a taken that of staff
 . a that staff The taken of colleagues and a photograph our bust to quite of size had good enlarged chamber
 bust quite good of chamber taken that . colleagues our and size a a of enlarged The staff photograph to had
 . staff chamber good and had of colleagues of enlarged taken to size quite a that a our photograph bust The
 and quite size of our bust good chamber a staff that to had taken The colleagues enlarged of photograph a .
 The had size to good our and taken bust of that a a quite . enlarged photograph staff colleagues of chamber
 size that a staff to photograph taken had of a quite our good chamber The bust colleagues of enlarged and .
 had of enlarged The bust staff a colleagues quite a to photograph our chamber taken size of and . that good
 . to of photograph colleagues size and a taken good of our a chamber The had quite staff bust that enlarged
 taken chamber of bust quite good size our The photograph of a had a staff that to enlarged and . colleagues
 a bust The that to of quite had photograph and chamber . size a enlarged taken staff colleagues our good of
 our a enlarged quite to chamber . The of that taken of good colleagues a staff photograph and size bust had
 taken enlarged and colleagues a size staff chamber of that a of had to our quite photograph bust The good .
 to of a size enlarged that chamber had a of good The taken . quite bust staff photograph and colleagues our
 a and size of photograph staff our . of colleagues that had taken quite bust good enlarged chamber to a The
The study noted that the relatively modest increase of CPP premiums between 1986 and 1993 resulted in 26,000 fewer jobs. 
It further noted that the increases have had and will continue to have a negative impact on the labour force. 
That contradicts the government's arguments that CPP premiums are not a payroll tax but, rather, a pension contribution. 
In their own report, the Department of Finance stated that employers' contributions to CPP and the Quebec Pension Plan are part of the compulsory payroll tax. 
The department warned against higher payroll taxes in that same report and called this tax just that, namely, a payroll tax.  
We on this side strongly believe there are a number of important issues contained in this bill that we should discuss before it is passed. 
There should be decreases in other taxes, perhaps other payroll taxes such as the employment insurance payroll tax, to make up for the increases in the CPP, so that the negative impact on jobs will not be felt as strongly.  
We should have a full evaluation of any changes to the Old Age Security system and how it will affect future incentives to save. 
The Auditor General should have free access not only to the fund but also to the board itself, lifting the limits on RRSP contributions so that people can have an opportunity to look after themselves, and removing the foreign investment restrictions on RRSP investments.  
Honourable senators, there are elements of truth in all things nefarious. 
That is why we call it propaganda. 
The government is an accomplished practitioner in this art of propaganda, with their plea to save the CPP and their prediction of dire consequences if action is not taken today, this minute. 
They made only token consultations. 
Invoking closure on the debate on Bill C-2 was the first indication of the government's intention. 
Now we are being told in the Senate by the government that it is important to act now because the Minister of Finance has an agreement with the provinces.  
The government's usual modus operandi is diversion, mixed with a little fabrication. 
It was convenient to have the diversion of a postal strike with its ensuing back-to-work legislation before the house while Bill C-2 was being introduced in the other place and closure was being imposed. 
It was also convenient for the government to falsely accuse the former prime minister of criminal intent and behaviour after its incompetence was fully exposed to the Canadian public following the Quebec referendum.  
It is not a question of means justifying the end. 
In this bill, the means and the end are equally wrong.  
 The staff of our chamber colleagues a photograph of that bust taken and enlarged to quite a good size .
 to of of size that enlarged chamber good our taken and quite bust colleagues The . had a photograph staff
 and good The enlarged staff taken size colleagues chamber a bust had . photograph of quite of our that to
 and of The colleagues a of chamber to a that photograph enlarged bust size . staff good had our taken
Marilyn and I took it to show to him just three or four days before he passed on. 
 show took I him just passed he days three it four or to and . Marilyn before on to
 days him and he to or four on Marilyn passed three I before just it show took . to
 to and days took him it he show . passed to before four I or just on Marilyn three
 and I passed show Marilyn him to days on it four or to before three he took just .
 or on passed Marilyn before I days it three took show and just four . him to to he
 and . to to it on I him Marilyn took or before days four show passed three just he
 he before to three . show on to him took days four passed just and it I or Marilyn
 Marilyn he show him passed on before to . and took four three or to days it I just
 it three four Marilyn passed or I just took him days on show to he to before and .
 took he four before him it Marilyn on three to just and passed or I . to show days
 he or I . three four Marilyn before show and to days passed on him just to it took
 or and on I to he took days . him to three just show Marilyn passed four before it
 it three he or I and days show Marilyn . before took passed just to on to four him
 to took days on four . Marilyn it to he him three show and before passed or just I
 took just four on to or it passed . days show to three Marilyn I him he and before
 I to days and it him passed show before Marilyn took . four or he just three on to
Where does the Canadian delegation stand with respect to this concept?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government):
Honourable senators, the media is reporting, of course, on a possible deal on targets and time-tables which could see Canada accepting a reduction of 5 per cent from 1990 levels bythe year 2010. 
At this point, these reports are speculative, but negotiations are ongoing.  
National Unity 
Recent Remarks of Prime Minister-Possible Conditions of Secession of Quebec-Government Position 
Hon. Pierre Claude Nolin :
Honourable senators, I would like to return to the matter of the Prime Minister's statement last weekend on Quebec's secession. 
He said in fact last week in Quebec City that he would be prepared to negotiate Quebec's separation, if certain conditions were met.  
I would first like to know what conditions the Prime Minister was referring to?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, the Government of Canada has always said that Quebecers would not be kept within Canada against their will. 
That being said, breaking up a country is not a step that one would take lightly. 
Senator Graham :
The will of Quebecers to leave must be clearly expressed. 
In addition, of course, any process that would lead to secession must respect the law.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
What does the law say on secession?  
Senator Graham :
The government has asked the Supreme Court of Canada to rule on the legality of unilateral secession.  
 Marilyn I took it to show to him just three or four days before he passed on .
 I . on to passed took it he to him show just days four before or and three
 took . to four days three passed before show him on and Marilyn he to just it I
 four passed Marilyn just he took before days and him three or it I on show to .
He saw the bust and he was pleased. 
 and was bust pleased the He he . saw
 He and pleased . the was he bust saw
 and pleased . was He he saw the bust
 saw . was He bust he the and pleased
 He saw and was he . the pleased bust
 saw the was He pleased and bust . he
 the bust He was and . saw he pleased
 and saw was He . bust he pleased the
 He pleased bust he the . saw and was
 and He he bust the saw pleased . was
 bust he He . the and was pleased saw
 pleased He bust the he saw . was and
 the was He saw he bust . pleased and
 the was bust he He pleased . and saw
 He . saw was and he the pleased bust
 the bust pleased He was . he saw and
It is not public money. 
No one is forced to invest in Royal Trust.  
Senator Gigantès :
The public is made up of individuals. 
These individuals are private persons. 
Under the proposed system, they would invest in something which may not make huge profits, but which will not experience the disasters of the private sector.  
Senator Bolduc :
It is a matter of choice. 
Senator Gigantès :
With a system such as the one proposed, one thing is for sure. 
There will be no Trevor Eyton to squander the money, there will be no Conrad Black or Olympia & York to take it away from you.  
Senator Bolduc :
I do not want to answer questions on specific cases, because I find it objectionable.  
Hon. Gerry St. Germain :
Honourable senators, the honourable senator who has just spoken brings a wealth of experience to this chamber. 
He was one of the top bureaucrats and one of the top men in the Quebec government at one time. 
He brings that experience to this forum.  
I would prefer to ask this question of the government side, but no one will speak further on it. 
Therefore, I will ask Senator Bolduc.  
This involves a question that I asked Senator Kirby yesterday. 
 He saw bust and he was pleased .
 He and saw the bust pleased he was
 saw the . He pleased was bust and
 and bust . he saw pleased He was
He turned to Bob Muir and said, "I guess they do care." 
 guess said ." " I Muir , turned they care Bob and to He do
 guess said turned and " they I Bob , He ." do to care Muir
 ." " said turned He to they and guess Muir I Bob care , do
 said " ." turned Muir to , Bob guess I they and care do He
 do " guess care and I Muir Bob turned they said ." , to He
 to I guess do turned care Muir " and , He Bob they said ."
 turned do , Bob to I said guess " and they Muir care ." He
 said and they guess ." care He do to " turned , Muir I Bob
 I care Bob guess said turned do " ." He , Muir they to and
 they " do Bob and said He I care Muir ." , turned guess to
 said I He to and , Bob ." turned care guess they " Muir do
 they to care do Bob I , Muir guess " said turned ." and He
 they I guess Muir care turned ." " to He , said and do Bob
 to Bob " , I Muir ." said they care turned do He and guess
 He to said ." do Muir " care guess and they turned Bob I ,
 Bob they He I turned to " , care do guess ." said and Muir
Again, honourable senators, this is a question of evidence. 
I refer all senators to the transcript.  
I wish to speak specifically about the fact that we are dealing with elites as opposed to the groups they represent. 
We questioned these representatives during the hearings as to whether their underlying groups agreed with the position they had taken.  
On the Catholic side, we had the position of the archbishops, as limited as it was. 
We had Catholic school boards and Catholic teachers. 
I remember specifically cross-examining Catholic teachers and asking whether they had discussions with students and their parents respecting the changes. 
Their view was that they represented the broad consensus of parents and students as it applied to this amendment. 
All parents wanted a change to renovate the school system, and this was the best modality in which to do that.  
I agree with Senator Lynch-Staunton, Senator Wood and Senator Lavoie-Roux that this is not perfect. 
However, in addition to the evidence, we did refer to opinion polls that seemed to suggest a strong support for reform along these lines.  
Yes, the resolution is imperfect. 
We would like to have done it "our way," as Frank Sinatra used to say, but we must deal with the Province of Quebec in this case. 
We had to bend imperfect tools to see whether they fit our minimum requirements. 
In my view, they did not fit our minimum requirements; they fit our reasonable requirements for constitutional amendment.  
Senator Wood :
Is it not true in the letter from the bishops of Quebec - the letter the honourable senator read - that they were in favour of repealing section 93? 
They questioned linguistic rights and suggested that denominational guarantees established by 107 be maintained. 
There was a caveat there that my honourable friend forgot to read.  
Senator Grafstein :
 He turned to Bob Muir said , " I guess they do care ."
 I and ." He , do they Bob said " turned to care guess
 do care to I and turned they Bob " ." He guess said ,
 He , Bob ." guess do said I to " and care Muir turned
Of course we care, John Michael. 
 we care Of . , Michael course John
 we John course Of . care Michael ,
 we John Michael . care Of course ,
 we course Of . , John Michael care
 . course John Michael we , Of care
 course Of . John we , care Michael
 Of care . we , course Michael John
 John we Michael . , course care Of
 , Michael Of we course . John care
 Michael course Of . we John , care
 John , course Of Michael . we care
 Michael Of care John . course we ,
 course Michael John , we care Of .
 Of , . care we Michael John course
 , Of course . we John care Michael
 care course , John we Of Michael .
It traces changes in voting eligibility, electioneering and voting practices, as well as voter turnout since Confederation. 
Extension of the vote to those who were excluded legally from the franchise, such as women, aboriginal people, religious and racial minorities, is examined in the social context of the period.  
Even though most Canadian adults were eligible to vote by 1920, there is a final chapter that looks at ways to make voting accessible to everyone, including people in all geographic locations and people with physical disabilities.  
A History of the Vote in Canada is meant to be an educational resource and a reminder to Canadians of the significance of the right to vote. 
This is in keeping with Elections Canada's 1993 mandate to educate voters about the democratic right to vote.  
While this book will appeal to historians, political scientists, university and high school teachers and students, it is hoped that it will also reach those who may have difficulty exercising their right to vote.  
As parliamentarians, honourable senators, it is our role to help promote this book and educate our fellow citizens on their rights as voters.  
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
Report of Committee 
Hon. Ron Ghitter , Chair of the Standing Senate Committee on Energy, the Environment and Natural Resources, presented the following report: 
Tuesday, December 9, 1997 
The Standing Senate Committee on Energy, the Environment and Natural Resources has the honour to present its 
SECOND REPORT 
Respectfully submitted, 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this bill be read the third time?  
On motion of Senator Butts, bill placed on the Orders of the Day for third reading at the next sitting of the Senate.  
Income Tax Conventions Implementation Act, 1997 
Report of Committee 
Hon. Michael Kirby , Chairman of the Standing Senate Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce, presented the following report: 
 course we care , John Michael .
 care , we Michael course Of .
 we . Of Michael course care John
 . care Of we , John Michael
We care very, very much.  
 , very very . care We much
 . very very care much , We
 , We much very . care very
 very We care very . , much
 very , . care We very much
 , very We very care much .
 We care very much , . very
 , We very care much . very
 very very We , much . care
 very care very We much . ,
 , very care We much . very
 very . care We very , much
 care much , very . We very
 , much care We very . very
 very , very care We much .
 very much very We . care ,
You talk with admiration of private investment management. 
How do you explain the disaster at Olympia & York, for example, under the management of Mr. Eyton, our colleague, and the fact that major players like Conrad Black closed Dominion Stores and took the money Dominion Stores employees had invested in a pension fund, a fund they never drew from? 
Are you telling us that the private sector will be more generous and wise than the Caisse de dépôt in Quebec? 
Senator Bolduc :
I did not say disasters did not happen in the private sector. 
Senator Gigantès :
It is not a big deal if you have $3 million, but it is if you lose $35,000 or $70,000 and this is all the money you have. 
It may not be a big deal for you, but it is for small investors.  
Senator Bolduc :
Honourable senators, I never said there would not be any damage in the private sector. 
Some damage is done every day. 
But it is the private sector. 
What you are doing with this bill is giving enormous powers to a few people with money belonging to all Canadians, particularly the poor. 
It is serious because we do not know how long this will last. 
Bills at second reading are always good measures. 
I saw more than my share in 40 years. 
Ministers come up with their legislation and they promise miracles. 
Three years later we take stock and discover that things are not like they were supposed to be. 
The minister's comments do not have nearly the same impact after three years.  
I am not saying everything is managed perfectly in the private sector, but I will tell you that it is the people's own money. 
 care very , very much .
 We , very much . care
 , . very care very We
 care very , We . much
Robert Muir would love to be here to regale us, as only he and Senator Buchanan can, with stories that surround John Michael Macdonald; a soldier, a gentleman, a teacher and, above all, a politician. 
 Muir us Senator a to can with a a , , gentleman soldier Robert to , here a Buchanan and John surround stories love politician that Michael regale . , Macdonald , he teacher , be only would above and ; all as
 only ; . us be , that a to would , regale , can Senator a above a and Buchanan with Michael , surround a politician love gentleman as all here to , soldier he Muir teacher Robert Macdonald and John stories ,
 . a , , a John us teacher above he would to , Macdonald politician ; only surround with Senator Michael stories Buchanan and soldier , to , Robert gentleman be love here a can Muir , as and that all regale a
 a , Robert be a teacher Michael can to Muir only to above John regale , a , love gentleman us as here he politician and surround . and a would stories ; , all , Buchanan with that Macdonald Senator , soldier
 teacher , regale and above politician Macdonald . Michael all here be a surround to , Muir a ; a to Buchanan that stories and would Senator , , as , only with a gentleman Robert soldier he us can , love John
 Muir and stories teacher to soldier that John , , to with above . Senator Buchanan and Michael surround here can a politician , ; gentleman only a , be a , all as would , Macdonald us love regale a Robert he
 as regale to politician can Michael Muir , a gentleman . John above a , would , only and a with to Macdonald surround , stories Robert a he soldier Buchanan teacher and , that , all be us love here ; Senator
 us love , here and , Robert soldier , a Senator can a to Michael , as John Macdonald be all he ; stories surround Muir above teacher Buchanan a only gentleman , a regale and . that politician , would with to
 Muir , a only John , all , Michael surround be a a to would , he teacher stories and soldier and , here ; love , Robert regale politician to that us as above Senator . Buchanan with Macdonald gentleman can a
 stories politician , , that , , Senator a would here love soldier us gentleman a to as , above be . ; all Michael surround to a Macdonald Buchanan Robert , only teacher he a and Muir with regale and John can
 he politician a would gentleman to Muir with , as only , Buchanan soldier us and a ; Michael Robert John all and regale a stories Senator above , Macdonald , , can a here , be love surround that to teacher .
 here surround a Senator would and Robert Macdonald to , stories . be a teacher gentleman , Muir a Michael that , us and love above all regale ; as , can politician only with a , soldier he Buchanan , John to
 he , , to only can that a John soldier . all Robert be a stories , with Michael here regale Buchanan , above would gentleman a surround us love politician , Macdonald a ; Muir as Senator to and , teacher and
 as only a and that he a teacher , surround above Buchanan , , regale can Senator , all a to us politician to with , ; John . gentleman , stories and a soldier here Michael Macdonald love Robert would Muir be
 teacher he only us and , regale love Macdonald to John a that politician would a stories . Michael , Senator , , with to soldier above surround ; and here all a , a gentleman Muir as Buchanan Robert , can be
 stories Robert love politician Muir Michael and only soldier and , would , , teacher , a as he regale , a surround , to that all here can a Macdonald Senator Buchanan ; gentleman be a to . with John above us
Many economic analyses of potential costs attributable to taking action to reduce emissions have been done, but no conclusions have been reached respecting timing or actual costs.  
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Informetrica Study on Meeting Targets-Government Position 
Hon. Mira Spivak :
Honourable senators, late last week, the consulting firm Informetrica released a study entitled, "The Scale of the Challenge for Reducing Canadian Greenhouse Gas Emissions." 
This report states: 
We conclude that there is almost no chance of meeting this goal in Canada under any reasonable economic scenario...  
And I stress this last part: 
...given current commitments to action.  
Could the Leader of the Government tell us if the relevant ministers are aware of this study, whether there have been any responses, or what the reaction has been to this prestigious firm's study?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
It provides very important data. 
I am not sure the government would necessarily agree with the findings of the study but, certainly, those findings will be taken into consideration.  
Senator Spivak :
I am glad to hear that.  
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Concept of Differing Targets-Government Position 
Hon. Mira Spivak :
In the current discussions in Kyoto, the idea of tailoring reductions targets to individual countries' economic and social profiles rather than having a one-size-fits-all commitment has gained some currency, particularly in view of the most recent American proposal. 
Where does the Canadian delegation stand with respect to this concept?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government):
Honourable senators, the media is reporting, of course, on a possible deal on targets and time-tables which could see Canada accepting a reduction of 5 per cent from 1990 levels bythe year 2010. 
 Robert Muir would love to be here to regale us , as only he and Buchanan can , with stories that surround John Michael Macdonald ; a soldier , a gentleman , a teacher and , above all , a politician .
 surround can . above here gentleman all to would to and as Buchanan soldier regale politician , with ; teacher Robert , Muir John be , , that Macdonald Senator , us , a a a and stories Michael only love he
 can , politician and a , here all ; us Michael regale a Robert with soldier love , would gentleman stories John be a , teacher , Buchanan above surround that to and to Macdonald Muir as a only , . he
 only , and , Macdonald soldier would , and to be Robert John Muir as love Senator with regale . here a us gentleman a all stories politician surround Buchanan a to a , he Michael , above , ; can that
He made politics an honourable profession in the 35 years that I have been involved in it, and it will be to his standard that I will, without any hesitation, look as I finish my sojourn through this place.  
 as and , profession place honourable to look will I hesitation it I it years his I without my politics involved have made the . , an 35 will any through in standard this finish been He in that sojourn that , be
 involved without as politics through standard be I He sojourn it that profession I have to hesitation honourable look , been I , and the will will that an my any made it place this in finish his 35 years . in ,
 through in an , any years be hesitation finish this politics look . that and I profession , will to as , honourable have place I I been will sojourn in that He without standard involved my the made it 35 his it
 , . look will that the involved I any He in , that will through sojourn I have in made as hesitation his place finish been and I years to profession , be this it an without 35 it my honourable standard politics
 honourable be I in , that look been , made will this that it . 35 and through my an finish to it have profession in any without the place as I will sojourn his hesitation involved He politics , I years standard
 standard will profession an politics . He my as look through be I finish hesitation , this to and , it honourable years I any made 35 will in , place involved sojourn I been his that the have in it that without
 profession place an that He hesitation that his been as years to look will standard it I have it 35 any this the politics . will I involved honourable through in , , , and I finish sojourn without be in made my
 in , any made sojourn have in will been place I an that that his the hesitation profession this through , will it He as my . without , to it honourable years I involved finish politics be I and 35 standard look
 this in be as politics that . , I without standard his have , to years the my made look been it involved honourable hesitation profession it in finish that I , and any He an will I will through sojourn 35 place
 made politics my have without 35 I profession , this hesitation . , to it involved been through an in I will as honourable be He it and finish any his look years place standard that that , sojourn will in I the
 this sojourn standard an will any look made have in 35 profession and be that that it finish years involved , will been to in honourable through I , without place I He my hesitation I it politics the . , his as
 been , years will place through made without this I any 35 that it in . an look standard it that his , hesitation I to be profession sojourn He I politics in have and , finish will honourable the my involved as
 He that in the look , , that I hesitation place profession be involved standard as an will . any will been years it through I honourable in made to 35 it sojourn his this without politics my have I , and finish
 in , that as will through involved be sojourn and I standard in to honourable finish have years without the it that I , it . 35 his , profession place will He politics any my been made this hesitation look an I
 politics made profession hesitation I my , be been will I that 35 years in . honourable I any and look his standard finish without in the through it , as to an that sojourn He , place have this it will involved
 politics any this finish place it years hesitation in look involved the , without , profession will He to . I have an been his made it as through , that honourable and my I that be 35 in will I sojourn standard
( a ) the Senate is opposed to the principle of a bill which has been placed before Parliament as a result of the judgment of the Supreme Court of Canada of May 22, 1997, and of the Court's Orders of June 27 and November 19, 1997; 
( b ) the Senate finds it repugnant that the Supreme Court is infringing on the sovereign rights of Parliament to enact legislation and is failing to respect the constitutional comity between the courts and Parliament; and 
( c ) the Court is in effect coercing Parliament by threatening chaotic consequences respecting law enforcement and arrests if Parliament does not pass this bill."  
Hon. Orville H. Phillips :
Honourable senators, I had adjourned the debate but I understand Senator Wood wishes to speak.  
Hon. Dalia Wood :
Honourable senators, I rise to speak in support of Senator Cools's amendment. 
The amendment, described as a reasoned amendment, is a parliamentary device which allows a member to raise concerns and opposition to the principles of a bill. 
The public's emerging concern with judicial activism, particularly in the area of criminal law, is compelling our interest and study. 
An example of this concern may be found in a December letter to The Ottawa Citizen . 
We should be mindful of these growing questions and concerns.  
I commend Senator Cools for bringing this amendment forward at this time. 
She often acts as our conscience, and I, for one, would like to thank her for all the hard work she puts into researching the bills that come before us.  
Senator Phillips :
Honourable senators, I was rather reluctant to enter this debate because I do not have a legal mind. 
Then the thought occurred to me that most lawyers do not either - and that includes a number of them in this chamber.  
My interest in this subject was piqued by a newspaper article where a detective was complaining about the awkward situation he would be in if this bill passed. 
Formerly, if he was pursuing someone into an apartment building, he could go in under the provisions of a hot pursuit and arrest the individual. 
Now, if the person being pursued enters an apartment building, and there are 50 or 60 apartments in the building, the detective is worrying that when he goes to a judge to get a warrant, does he have to get a warrant for each of the apartments in the building, because he really does not know which one he is in.  
Two people said they saw Mr. Feeney drive Mr. Boyle's truck from the scene. 
 He made politics an honourable profession in the 35 years that I have been involved in it , and it will be to his standard that I will , without any hesitation , look as I finish my sojourn through place .
 the will that years I been . my hesitation 35 involved in honourable made in I sojourn standard without any politics his it have be He as , finish that I and will , profession this look an through , to it
 be I his as , sojourn look without politics honourable 35 that , will , an years my will I in it through involved and He been made this standard hesitation have to any the profession . that I it finish in
 standard it my politics profession finish 35 I an through He and made as this I involved that , sojourn to years in look that in without hesitation any place , be the honourable his will will . have been I ,
Hon. Ethel Cochrane :
 Ethel Cochrane : . Hon
 : Ethel . Hon Cochrane
 . Ethel Hon : Cochrane
 Hon Cochrane : . Ethel
 Ethel . Cochrane : Hon
 . Cochrane Hon : Ethel
 Ethel . Hon : Cochrane
 : Hon Ethel Cochrane .
 . Ethel Hon : Cochrane
 . Hon Cochrane Ethel :
 . Hon Cochrane : Ethel
 : Ethel Hon . Cochrane
 Ethel Cochrane : . Hon
 Ethel Hon . : Cochrane
 . Hon Cochrane : Ethel
 . Ethel Hon Cochrane :
Retiring at age 65, dropping dead three to six years later, depending on your gender, was good for governments. 
At its inception in 1965 - payments started on January 1, 1967 - in order to be eligible for CPP benefits, you had to be 68, and 68 was about the same year that the average male died. 
It was the perfect pension plan:
Pay all your lives, and then die just as the first cheque is put into the mail. 
If there was a postal strike, the government had the benefit of both worlds - the pensioner was dead and the cheque was in the mail.  
From the beginning, the CPP was simple, but it was misnamed. 
It was misnamed because it is also a life insurance program. 
However, it is a silly program when it is part of a pension plan.  
Instead of cancelling the benefit, there is an argument made as to whether it should be means tested when cancelled or not. 
That is an area where we can save a lot of money because, as people are dying today, cheques are going out in the mail, at $3,500 a shot. 
Yet we do not have enough money to pay proper pensions when people are alive.  
It is also a disability program. 
There is nothing wrong with having a disability program, but it is part of the Canada Pension Plan now. 
It is part of a payroll tax to buy universal disability insurance, and then the social engineers took over.  
I want to give senators an historical perspective. 
There have been many amendments made over the years to the CPP. 
Yet, the government has said, "We will not touch that fund." 
However, they touched the other fund. 
Since 1973, they have been making new legislation and implementing new programs. 
Why will they not use the fund that will accumulate on the other side, over which Parliament has no control? 
 . Ethel Cochrane :
 Cochrane . Ethel :
 . Hon Cochrane Ethel
 Ethel : Cochrane .
Honourable senators, I rise with a tremendous sense of sadness to mourn the loss of the Honourable John M. Macdonald. 
 Honourable to of Honourable M John of sense with tremendous I senators the . loss the mourn a Macdonald . rise , sadness
 with mourn rise of loss of Honourable . to sadness sense Macdonald the John I M Honourable tremendous a . senators , the
 a tremendous . Honourable of sense of John mourn , . I rise to Honourable senators loss sadness Macdonald M the the with
 . the I with sadness rise . of Honourable tremendous the mourn a Macdonald Honourable of John , senators to sense M loss
 , Honourable sadness rise . the senators Macdonald John tremendous a of M to of I mourn with sense Honourable . the loss
 sense Macdonald . with John rise sadness . the of I M a Honourable the Honourable senators loss tremendous of mourn , to
 , . the sadness I with Honourable a mourn to of the M Macdonald John senators . Honourable loss rise tremendous sense of
 John loss . a . the tremendous I Honourable Macdonald Honourable M the sense to with rise senators mourn , of sadness of
 , of . with senators M Honourable Macdonald of sadness the John to . I sense rise Honourable the mourn tremendous loss a
 sadness . John Honourable I with the , rise a Macdonald Honourable mourn of the senators sense loss M tremendous . of to
 tremendous with Honourable loss of John the the , rise I a of mourn . Honourable sadness M . senators sense Macdonald to
 loss sense a the John sadness to Honourable M of Honourable with of the I . tremendous , senators Macdonald rise mourn .
 the sense Macdonald M Honourable . sadness with tremendous loss John the to a . Honourable senators mourn of of I rise ,
 Honourable M a to . the John senators mourn of loss sadness the . tremendous Honourable , sense I of with rise Macdonald
 Honourable senators of mourn the rise sadness tremendous loss a sense . M I John Honourable Macdonald , to the of . with
 sense John . to a of the Macdonald . the Honourable rise , tremendous with Honourable loss senators mourn of sadness M I
Senator Gigantès :
Not as much as the women are.  
Senator Tkachuk :
Then the benefits were extended. 
The provision went from having to live together for seven years to share in CPP benefits - in other words, when one died the other one would pick up the cash - down to one year. 
If you lived together for one year, the other person was considered your husband or your wife, and benefits again were extended to the surviving spouse - another increased cost.  
Yesterday, Senator Kirby alluded to the possibility that there may be other social changes in those arrangements. 
I know what that means. 
It is possible that governments may recognize gay marriages, and I think he wanted to let us know that there may be these kinds of changes taking place. 
That is fine, if the government wants to do that. 
Now you have two guys living together; one dies, the other one is picking up some cash. 
That costs more money. 
Well, two guys who live together for one year may not be gay. 
How would you know?  
Senator Gigantès :
You want surveillance cameras?  
Senator Tkachuk :
So there is an opportunity for fraud. 
This is not a pension program. 
Let us make that clear. 
 Honourable senators I rise with a tremendous sense of sadness to mourn the loss of the Honourable John M . Macdonald .
 mourn to loss . Honourable Honourable , M tremendous the I John a sadness senators . rise of the of with sense
 M sadness Macdonald Honourable Honourable with of , the of loss rise . the I mourn John to sense . senators tremendous
 John sadness I . Macdonald , of sense senators the a mourn Honourable loss the . rise M to tremendous of Honourable
I deeply regret that I was unable to attend his memorial service. 
 service was . to I I that attend unable memorial deeply regret his
 to was . I that memorial attend unable service deeply his I regret
 I to unable attend service memorial was I his . that deeply regret
 unable to . regret his service I was deeply I attend memorial that
 attend memorial that his . deeply I was regret service I to unable
 unable I . I was service regret memorial deeply his that to attend
 attend unable deeply I to memorial was . that regret I service his
 that attend service his . to deeply was I regret memorial I unable
 that I to was attend I service regret . deeply memorial unable his
 that memorial his was attend regret deeply unable I I service to .
 I . I service that attend to was unable regret deeply his memorial
 his to memorial deeply . was I regret attend unable service I that
 I memorial unable I regret his . that to deeply service was attend
 that deeply I his to service was . memorial regret unable I attend
 attend his I unable to memorial service regret deeply I that . was
 was . his I unable to memorial regret that I service deeply attend
I think last night they had dinner with Finance Minister Paul Martin. 
In an article in The Globe and Mail yesterday, it was stated: 
With Ontario's Ernie Eves and B.C.'s Andrew Petter leading the charge, the provincial ministers have made it clear that they consider Mr. Martin's recent $1.4 billion cut to unemployment insurance premiums insufficient...  
The premiers have insisted that they have some input into Ottawa's budget-making and how it allocates the surplus among new spending, tax cuts and debt repayment.  
In a telephone interview on Friday, Mr. Petter said the NDP government in British Columbia wants Ottawa to offset a dramatic increase in Canada Pension Plan premiums with reductions in UI premiums.  
"We're worried about the impact that Canada Pension Plan increases will have in terms of the burden they will impose on business and workers, and the potential they have to reduce job creation by a huge amount if they go ahead without some kind of offsetting relief," Mr. Petter said.  
Ontario's Conservative government is also demanding large cuts to UI premiums, Mr. Eves said in an interview...  
Alberta Treasurer Stockwell Day also indicated last week that he'll be pushing Mr. Martin for tax cuts.  
I predict today that, although this government has managed to get away with things for which our government would have been slaughtered, I think this bill, coupled with what is coming down the track and the changes in OAS and GIS, coupled with the arrogance of the stance taken at Kyoto, this is the kind of arrogance that, inevitably, will be the downfall of this government. 
I predict that that is about to happen.  
Hon. Thelma J. Chalifoux :
Honourable senators, I have a number of concerns regarding the statements of Senator Stratton. 
I would like to know what his position is on the working poor and on part-time workers. 
In this country, there are more part-time workers and more working poor than there are people who identify as middle class. 
What is the honourable senator's opinion on that?  
In this country, we have a totally isolated segment of society which is called "the mid-Canada corridor." 
Even in terms of communications, there is very little. 
What would the honourable senator do in the area of communication for those in isolated settlements regarding private pension plans? 
There are no words in Cree or michif for "private pension plan."  
I was a member of the working poor in 1965 and 1966 when this plan was put into force. 
 I deeply regret that I was unable to attend his service .
 service his I that regret deeply to was attend memorial I unable
 regret unable I was to memorial that his attend service I .
 I deeply memorial unable service his that to attend . I was
I was away from home at the time and did not receive notice of his death until the day of the service. 
 did until not time notice his and was I from death . the receive of service home at the the day of away
 home away was time notice not of the the I receive did day of from the until death at his . and service
 of . home at I receive the and notice the the from service away time death not until did day his of was
 not did time the the from death of receive . until the home I day notice his service was and of at away
 did not service of the from time I and notice away . the the death day home until at of his receive was
 notice did service day I time the at the of not the home of was away from . until death his and receive
 and the service was time notice the the until receive away . of death from day I home did of his at not
 not his of I was service death notice the day from home did receive the the of time at away until and .
 . the of and was until death his notice of the the not at day did service receive I time away home from
 did death and away I the time until . at day home was of receive his service not the from notice the of
 was I receive at did service death and time away the not from of the until the day . home of his notice
 was his notice not the receive the of death service day the time away of from at did I and . home until
 of death did of service the home was his the day from until not away . and the notice I receive at time
 I of . not death of his service the from the home and receive at notice until day did time away the was
 from not the I the . death of away and home until service receive at was notice time the did day his of
 of of the and I death notice receive was home away . time did not day his from until service the at the
Every year, we save $80 billion, or 10 per cent of the gross national product, which goes to income security, including $22 billion from old age pensions, $23 billion from the Canada pension fund and $30 billion or $35 billion from private pension plans. 
Savings coming from private pension plans should remain stable in the future or else get smaller depending on the decisions we make. 
Contributions will increase by 70 per cent within five to seven years. 
I think the amounts will remain stable, but they could also drop, if this increase is not compensated by an equivalent decrease in income tax, for instance.  
As for RRSPs, they are likely to diminish if employment insurance contributions and taxes are not lowered.  
In my opinion, we will likely see a reduction in private savings, along with an increase in public savings. 
Is it a good thing to increase the role of the state? 
This is what is being done here. 
It implies that if it is in the public domain, the money will be better invested than if individuals invest their savings in the private sector. 
Who can possibly think that it makes sense?  
What happened in the past? 
Can it be said that the government was more cautious than individuals in the management of its funds? 
I am not blaming one government in particular, but the public sector's attitude is often like that. 
I simply note that this is the way things have been done for 40 years.  
Did the government display more shrewdness in the management of business investments? 
Look at the performance of crown corporations. 
Air Canada, CN and Canadair all did well after being privatized. 
In other words, good management started once the government was no longer involved.  
So, we should be cautious before giving the public sector increased responsibilities for the management of funds. 
We must be careful before transferring money from the private to the public sector.  
 I was away from home at the time and did not receive notice of his death until the day of the service
 service the did day home until away of his notice . at time the not from I the of death was and
 and his not until service the of day I home death receive of away the at from notice time did the was
 day the I his and from did of . was until not of the receive notice home at away service death the
I have only the fondest memories of John M. I treasured him as the institutional memory of our caucus. 
 memories only fondest treasured M as him of caucus . I memory the our I institutional the of have . John
 caucus our . the I memory treasured John M fondest him institutional only . memories as the of I of have
 memory caucus . John as M the him I fondest I only of our the have institutional treasured memories of .
 fondest institutional the M I memories only . as him memory caucus John I our the of . of treasured have
 I John the caucus our only fondest . have treasured institutional M of memories memory of as . him I the
 our . memories the of have as treasured only institutional caucus fondest I . John memory of I M the him
 him fondest John the treasured memories the I have as institutional caucus . our only I of memory M of .
 of him only institutional the memory I caucus fondest have . M . John treasured our of the I memories as
 have I as I only fondest . him memories M of of John caucus the our memory the . institutional treasured
 caucus of . memories our treasured have the M . as of only John memory I the fondest institutional him I
 as the the . have I memory institutional fondest only our treasured of memories caucus him M John of . I
 . our I the fondest M memory treasured caucus of institutional I John have him as only the . of memories
 as of John . our caucus institutional memories M only . treasured of I have fondest I the him the memory
 memory memories have institutional as I . I . the only fondest our M of treasured him John the caucus of
 treasured the . M fondest only John . memory as I the of him institutional of memories have I our caucus
 I John have the memories I M of him institutional treasured the memory as . fondest our of . only caucus
Senator Gigantès :
Having listened to you, we know they are right.  
Senator Tkachuk :
Why not take the time - 
Senator Gigantès :
And the tedium?  
That is what we need to tell them at Christmas when we go home; not that we passed the bill.  
Hon. Roch Bolduc :
Honourable senators, I will not go back over the very important points raised by my colleague with respect to the intergenerational inequity in this bill. 
I would like to look at other aspects of the problem.  
Honourable senators, the government is proposing to amend the CPP. 
I would have found it appropriate to examine all the major aspects of the plan at this time. 
This has been done for some important facets such as its survival, its management and its performance. 
I will address these shortly.  
This strikes me as an important question. 
Why, for instance, if I do not wish to contribute and prefer to look after my own financial security, should I be obliged by law to participate in the plan, even if I am prepared to sign a document absolving the government of all responsibility on my account? 
Why must everyone belong to a plan whose money will be invested by others, by public servants?  
The government's response to this fundamental question is obligatory collectivization. 
The government seems to assume that Canadians are irresponsible, ignorant, and improvident, and that big brother in Ottawa knows best.  
If he is so competent, what has this big brother been doing for 20 years? 
 I have only the fondest memories of John M . I treasured him as the memory of our caucus .
 have of I I our memories the as only . the him treasured institutional memory of John fondest caucus M
 treasured only . him I M institutional the the memories have our John as fondest of I memory of caucus
 institutional of memories I our John memory him caucus treasured of I the . only have M the fondest as
He had a remarkable ability to recollect the details of elections, the events of the Diefenbaker years and the politics and the issues that came and went during his many years in Ottawa.  
 elections in Diefenbaker remarkable issues the politics the recollect He to had ability the that events a during and his years came went , and the details of many years and the . of Ottawa
 issues and details Ottawa events elections to in the a many Diefenbaker He during , years came of years went that the and and the recollect remarkable . the the his ability politics of had
 the politics many details remarkable came . the and the the his the elections in , went a He had events years issues recollect and ability to that Diefenbaker of during years Ottawa and of
 came the ability of recollect to that . during , elections a and of details many Diefenbaker the and went in issues Ottawa politics his the years the the events remarkable He had and years
 and the events to a the had remarkable recollect the went and , and details of issues He politics . came that in elections years the Ottawa his the ability years many during of Diefenbaker
 in the and the his the issues the and the ability recollect politics had years to a details years of went Ottawa of events Diefenbaker during many that remarkable . came and elections He ,
 remarkable events politics ability and the his a came issues Ottawa of many had the the and recollect Diefenbaker to in . , during of that He details elections the went and years the years
 went years ability Diefenbaker politics recollect in . and elections came his , many and events and that the the issues Ottawa of remarkable the during years details the to of the He had a
 and He recollect issues the to and Diefenbaker and a ability his went . politics many Ottawa , events years came of the the elections remarkable of details in that had the the years during
 that of . had Diefenbaker during came ability the his the of the issues and to He Ottawa years in elections a went , many politics remarkable the events recollect years the and and details
 his and had Ottawa issues details that to , came a during elections . the and events and many recollect the of Diefenbaker went in the years ability of years He the politics the remarkable
 Ottawa the and the issues years that politics , the had many the . of remarkable his recollect went during details Diefenbaker of a the years in and He ability elections to and came events
 recollect and in ability his details of events the remarkable that Diefenbaker the and issues He Ottawa politics years had during of . to went elections the the a years , many and came the
 to years came and a elections the politics had , ability issues of and Ottawa the remarkable in the during went He his that the Diefenbaker details of . recollect years and the events many
 the details of elections recollect the had years his years in of the that ability remarkable issues and Ottawa , many to a Diefenbaker events . during and and the the politics went He came
 the Ottawa a the to years many in events , years and details the his issues and Diefenbaker politics went came recollect ability and . the that the elections remarkable had during of He of
He had the right to have a vehicle and operate it, and he had the right to have money in his possession. 
All those were taken away from him, and all the Supreme Court of Canada could think of was that piece of paper called a "warrant" and to criticize the police for not having such a document.  
I wanted to suggest that perhaps criminals should apply for a warrant before they commit murder, but I do not want to pursue that because I am afraid that some Charter judge will give them a warrant or a licence to do so. 
Fifteen years ago, I would have been shocked at criticism of a decision rendered by the Supreme Court; but, today that is commonplace. 
When a major decision comes down from the Supreme Court, the media is there to interview people who wish to comment, mostly negatively, on the decision. 
As I stated, we would not have seen a headline like that 15 years ago.  
That is their function, and Parliament has referred it to them. 
However, the enactment of laws remains the function of Parliament. 
It is not the function of the Supreme Court of Canada or any other court to make laws.  
Honourable senators, I read in today's paper where the families of the Leslie Mahaffy and Kristen French, both of whom were killed by Paul Bernardo, are appealing to the judge to make a law prohibiting evidence of that type being heard by the public in court. 
The interesting point is that they are asking the judge to make the law; they are not asking Parliament. 
Parliament is the highest court in the land and that must always be so. 
It would be most unusual to have a lower court issue a directive to a higher court.  
Honourable senators, I commend Senator Cools for all the work and research she has done. 
Many aspects of her amendment are worthwhile considering. 
However, I feel she has omitted to take into consideration one aspect of our legislation.  
Any law passed by Parliament does not become law until it receives Royal Assent, and having the Supreme Court direct Parliament to pass a law by December 19, 1997 takes away the prerogative of the sovereign. 
That is why we have Royal Assent. 
We could have the ridiculous situation of one of the judges who ordered the enactment of this legislation by December 19 coming into this chamber and giving Royal Assent on behalf of the sovereign.  
Motion in Sub-Amendment 
 He a remarkable ability to recollect the details of elections , the events of the Diefenbaker years and the politics and the issues that came and went during his many years in Ottawa .
 the recollect the the in had years his many during ability that a remarkable . of of elections years He events details Diefenbaker and the and , the politics and to went issues came
 Diefenbaker during politics remarkable ability the years and the came , had many the details elections that of of a years and He to and in the issues his events went Ottawa . recollect
 during and the . Ottawa recollect years of the his came to elections went had , and the the He and issues years Diefenbaker in many details the events ability politics that remarkable of
John M. was a true Cape Bretoner with the politics of that region in his blood. 
 the . . a true John was M politics region that Bretoner blood of in with Cape his
 true Cape region a blood the was that his M . politics in of John . Bretoner with
 region the that M in with Cape . of true Bretoner a politics blood John was . his
 was region a M in politics Bretoner . his blood that John of the . true with Cape
 politics Cape was . Bretoner true in that John blood with region . of a the M his
 politics Bretoner blood in . the . a was with region his of that John Cape true M
 with that the Bretoner blood in true . region . M a was his John of Cape politics
 of in blood with his that the M John . region politics was . true a Bretoner Cape
 blood a his true Bretoner . Cape with the that was . region in of M John politics
 blood of . Bretoner the . that John a his region Cape in with true politics M was
 in M blood Cape politics with his was a John region of the . Bretoner . that true
 a M region that Cape . of John was his politics Bretoner blood . in with the true
 true . . politics Bretoner with blood Cape John his that M a of the was in region
 true a was . . politics M Cape Bretoner his with blood the region that of John in
 . with true blood his that a Bretoner John Cape M in . was region politics the of
 with Bretoner true was of a his M in Cape . region politics . the blood that John
However, we do not believe that the amendment was justified because the denominational education rights guaranteed under section 93 were nothing more than empty shells. 
Had we been satisfied that the majority of Catholics or Protestants in Quebec were opposed to the amendment, it would not have mattered whether or not their rights carried much weight. 
I think that Senator Lavoie-Roux was quite right in saying that minorities often require special protection to be free to exercise their rights. 
But it is possible to limit or remove this special protection with the consent of a majority of this minority.  
It was then a matter of figuring out why a majority of members of these two groups were prepared to relinquish these privileges. 
It is important to point out that representatives of all the groups involved were consulted.  
Be that as it may, honourable senators, this amendment will not spell the end of denominational, be it Catholic or Protestant, education in Quebec. 
The Education Act of this province gives parents the right to choose between Catholic or Protestant denominational education for their children. 
It will be up to parents to decide whether publicly funded denominational education should be maintained indefinitely. 
The fact that the notwithstanding clause was used by the Government of Quebec to protect the existing education legislation seems to indicate, however, that the government reacted favourably to the wish expressed by some parents to maintain Protestant and Catholic denominational schools. 
We have every reason to believe that the place of religion in public education will be subject to a full, open and democratic debate and that the parents' choice will continue to prevail, as it has for so long outside Montreal and Quebec City.  
Throughout the debate that took place before the special joint committee and in this House, we considered the fact that subsection 23(1) of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms does not apply to Quebec and the issue of whether the amendment to section 93 would prejudice the educational rights of native Quebecers. 
Section 23 of the Charter and section 93 of the Constitution Act of 1867 concern educational rights and, instinctively, we might think they are closely linked. 
However, they are not constitutionally related and, in any case it seems entirely ill-advised to reduce consent for constitutional change to a mere transaction where one right serves as a bargaining chip for the improvement of another.  
Honourable senators, I strongly urge you to support this resolution. 
Although we noted there was a consensus to amend section 93, we felt the real issue was the quality of the education of children in Quebec, and on that point opinion was unanimous.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Senator Robichaud, allow me to correct an impression that you left and to ask you a question. 
However, I wanted to make this correction, because you referred to the "government in place", when in fact it was the Liberal government of the day that made the decision, over the objections of the Parti Québécois then in opposition.  
I am asking you the same question I asked Senator Grafstein, but to which I did not get an answer. 
 John M . was a true Cape Bretoner with the politics of that region in his blood
 the . of his M in was politics true region Bretoner a . blood that John with
 blood was that his . Cape M in Bretoner of . a region the politics John with
 Bretoner in region M Cape the that true John of . with a was politics blood his
He served Cape Breton well during his long career in the Senate. 
 long Cape the served well during He in career . Breton Senate his
 . career his in long the Breton served well Senate He Cape during
 well He Cape long during served Senate . career the in Breton his
 career the during his well . served Breton He long in Cape Senate
 Cape during served career long in He Breton his . Senate the well
 He Breton served in Cape the during his Senate career long . well
 Senate during his career . well Cape long He served in Breton the
 Cape during long Senate He the served . well in Breton his career
 Senate during . his long career served Breton well the He in Cape
 during long his . He well in Cape served career the Breton Senate
 Breton his He long career well during Cape in Senate . the served
 Senate He Breton his . during Cape career in long the well served
 his career well the Breton in Cape during He Senate long served .
 Cape Senate in . served the during well Breton He his career long
 . career during long his well served Senate He in the Cape Breton
 his long well Cape Senate during He in . the career served Breton
Barring that formal process, Senator Stewart has witnesses to hear from tomorrow, and I should like him to have permission to hear those witnesses tomorrow.  
Hon. John Lynch-Staunton (Leader of the Opposition) :
That worked for a while. 
Now we have forgotten Mondays, but we have continued on with the practice of having early sittings on Wednesdays. 
As a result, Wednesday has become a normal working session, going on until five or six o'clock. 
The whole purpose of starting the session at 1:30 p.m. has been defeated.  
I do not think it is correct, unless there is an urgency, for committees to sit at the same time as the chamber. 
This is not for appearances' sake, but because the work done here can often be as important in the debates as what goes on in committees. 
At various stages of our work - the introduction of bills, second reading, committee referral, then third reading - we are often doing several at the same time. 
Sometimes even two, three or four committees are sitting when we are sitting. 
That is an improper practice.  
If the deputy leader could guarantee to us that, on Wednesdays from now on - and we will strive to be cooperative - we will sit no later than 3:30 p.m., unless there is a proven urgency, then I think Senator Stewart's motion is in order. 
However, we need that assurance first.  
Senator Carstairs :
Let me assure the Leader and Deputy Leader of the Opposition that we will do everything on our part to ensure that sessions end on time. 
We did sit yesterday, which was a Monday. 
I can assure senators we will be sitting next Monday in order to fulfil the business of the chamber before the Christmas break.  
Senator Kinsella :
On that basis, I do not think leave is necessary.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
 He served Cape Breton well during long career in the Senate .
 . career well served long the during Breton Cape Senate He in
 Senate in his long the . Breton served career Cape well during
 long served Senate the Cape Breton He in . well during his
He was a true Conservative, serving for two decades as whip and caucus chair. 
 , true He chair was as Conservative a caucus . for whip decades serving two and
 decades chair as , two true . for He caucus whip a serving was Conservative and
 for a serving He true as decades was and Conservative whip caucus chair , . two
 as , a Conservative for true He was chair caucus and whip decades two . serving
 Conservative . as two , caucus and for a true chair whip serving decades was He
 true whip was a , and caucus two for chair decades . as serving Conservative He
 , and He . chair decades serving two was whip caucus Conservative for as a true
 He a chair as . whip Conservative true , and for two caucus serving decades was
 He caucus and whip decades Conservative , chair a was for two . true serving as
 and as true whip , chair caucus Conservative two for serving He . was decades a
 a two serving and as . for decades caucus was He chair true Conservative whip ,
 for chair He and decades whip Conservative was caucus as , two a serving true .
 whip , and . caucus was two serving as a for decades He true chair Conservative
 a for and decades chair . , two was true He caucus whip as Conservative serving
 was as chair true serving Conservative , whip caucus He and two for . decades a
 decades Conservative , and for was chair true a serving He as whip two . caucus
I am referring to the Investment Board.  
All the contributions will be invested by this so-called Investment Board. 
I would like to start by saying that in 10 years, we will have a government agency managing some $150 billion.  
Do you realize how much power these people will have? 
Every week, every Monday morning when these people arrive at work, they will find in front of them millions and millions of dollars that they will have to invest immediately. 
Three billion dollars is $3,000 million. 
Theoretically, this is $600 million a day. 
This has to be invested right away, it cannot wait until the afternoon.  
Do you think that the heavy machinery required for these operations will be efficient? 
Impossible, honourable senators. 
There will be lost efficiency, which means financial losses. 
Those who believe that "big brother" will be kinder than the community of specialists in the private sector are seriously wrong.  
Even for the private sector specializing in this type of operations, whether mutual funds, national brokerages, or trusts, when the volume exceeds $50 or $60 million, the performance ratio is not proportional to the volume of the funds being managed.  
Private enterprise is aware of that. 
It seems only the government is not.  
The huge monopoly to be created presents a very high risk of inefficiency, of bad investments, and therefore of poor performance. 
Why should everyone be obliged to contribute, to provide funds to a manager who may do a worse job than the person who actually owns those funds?  
If some are deemed to have not done a good job, they are replaced, something is done about it.  
We are familiar with the virtues of competition in the private sector, which results in a raised level of performance. 
That is good for the consumer, so why would it not be applicable to this particular type of services?  
 He was a Conservative , serving for two decades as whip and caucus chair .
 a true caucus decades . for as Conservative serving chair , two and He was
 Conservative caucus serving chair a was decades as , for two He . whip and
 He serving Conservative . , and two caucus was for true a whip decades as
His commitment to this party was both remarkable and admirable. 
 His was and . admirable both remarkable this party to commitment
 His was both remarkable party admirable and commitment to . this
 admirable was party His and both to this remarkable commitment .
 to admirable party was . commitment remarkable and this His both
 and remarkable commitment was party both this admirable . His to
 commitment remarkable and both to . party was this admirable His
 party this . commitment was admirable remarkable His both and to
 was His . both commitment this admirable remarkable and to party
 commitment His both this was and to remarkable party . admirable
 party His was commitment this and to . remarkable both admirable
 . this admirable was and party commitment to His both remarkable
 His to commitment this and remarkable both . admirable was party
 was and His remarkable this both . party commitment to admirable
 admirable this both . commitment was to His party and remarkable
 commitment both to and this His admirable party remarkable . was
 remarkable and to this commitment . admirable His both was party
I thank the honourable senator for her question. 
It was an excellent question, and it is one that she should ask of the government. 
She should ask the government what they are doing to communicate the changes to our pension plan system as a whole.  
Senator Chalifoux :
I am asking you.  
Senator Stratton :
First, because of the $600-billion debt that the pension plan has, I do not think that we can privatize it at this time. 
I do not think the people the honourable senator talked about, and the people of my generation, are prepared enough financially to make that transition. 
You cannot do that immediately. 
One needs only consider the situation of Chile. 
Chile is a long, skinny country on the west coast of South America, and I really do believe they have a communications problem there as severe as ours. 
I told honourable senators the story of the finance minister in Chile, going on television every three weeks to a month, and breaking down the new plan into segments, talking to the people, because they all have television, and communicating in that fashion. 
That was the government's way of dealing with it in Chile. 
The only way to communicate is eyeball to eyeball. 
You have to get out and talk to people in their backyards. 
There is no great hurry for this bill to get through, at least not to the degree that you could not do that. 
Why not insist that your government take our committee out there to talk to your people?  
Senator Chalifoux :
We talked to the Conservative government about that for many years and nothing was done.  
Senator Comeau :
 His commitment to this was both remarkable and admirable .
 to and was party both . remarkable His this admirable
 . admirable and was party this remarkable His both to
 admirable and this remarkable . both party was His to
In any circumstances, in any kind of weather, regardless of the inconvenience, John M. was there for his party, just as he was for his region and his country.  
 . John was inconvenience his just , for any his of , there in his the . country party of he was as kind In , and region , any circumstances weather regardless for M
 his M was , for there the of was his , regardless region he country . weather in , . , inconvenience John circumstances any any and In kind for as party just his of
 in his John , , . his , just . for was region of as In and any of for weather the was there circumstances his kind party , country inconvenience M he regardless any
 and . his M in party , he circumstances his kind inconvenience country any as , was of weather John regardless there just . , In any for region was , of his the for
 , in of was just M , country the for party circumstances was his he any there . kind of John as his , weather and his , regardless inconvenience In for any region .
 as was and of . circumstances M for was party , John , there regardless of any for just weather . , the any he in inconvenience region his , his kind country In his
 . , circumstances his there country . inconvenience for his in party , his just , of as region any regardless for In and was M was any the of he kind John , weather
 just as his circumstances , , region any he , M John kind was regardless for of and , for the there party any . was weather his . his inconvenience in In country of
 the circumstances was , , In in there kind his weather inconvenience any , as region . M country John and any for of his for . party he regardless , his just was of
 M inconvenience his in there the John of and as , circumstances was of . his country for regardless , any any was , for just he , In party region kind weather his .
 for was the . his for just as there in circumstances In he , of his was , John . party regardless , of country kind any region and , M any inconvenience weather his
 there country inconvenience , circumstances for region M John for . In regardless the and , as his of any his kind party . his of any he was , was , just in weather
 M his regardless was any weather , his . In the of , region his , was circumstances , John as inconvenience for party any of for just he there in country and kind .
 region he for In in M party circumstances for John inconvenience his kind there , his just . any , any and weather the regardless as his . of , , of was was country
 country as he , for was inconvenience party , and . , the just any In circumstances M weather for regardless there was . region in his John his his , any of kind of
 his regardless just his inconvenience for . In any the was John . , he as of , country M there party in any region kind weather of was for , his circumstances and ,
The Senate 
Response to Newspaper Article on Senator's Residency Qualifications 
Hon. Colin Kenny :
Honourable senators, I rise today on behalf of a colleague who cannot be present, Senator Paul Lucier. 
Senator Lucier has sent me a fax which he has asked me to communicate to the chamber. 
For your benefit, he wants me to reply to the comments made about him in the media recently.  
He writes: 
I would like to make some points with respect to this matter: 
The Citizen said: "Paul Lucier said the Senate's legal staff approved his change in residency five years ago when he moved to Vancouver."  
Senator Lucier says: 
This is not true. 
I never spoke with legal staff five years ago about this. 
I never had any problem about residency.  
2. The Citizen said: "He said Senate staff told him he could keep his seat as long as he continues to own property in the Yukon."  
Senator Lucier replies: 
Again, I never spoke to the staff and was therefore never told any such comment. 
On my attendance, 21 % (19 out of 87 sittings), and on the statement: "He says - 
Senator Lucier has underlined the word "says."  
- he has bone cancer and must live in the British Columbia city for treatments".  
Senator Lucier replies: 
 In any circumstances , in any kind of weather , regardless of the inconvenience , John M . was there for party , just as he was for his region and his country .
 , country just kind inconvenience region weather of his circumstances John regardless , , his . in his party was , as the and of any was he In M there for for any
 John was In was kind party and of , M in his any , just . . inconvenience his there his , he any weather , the for circumstances regardless region as country for
 kind country circumstances John . weather , , , was there of regardless region was for party inconvenience , . as of In for he his and just M the his any in his
John M. was a friend. 
 . M . was friend a John
 . a friend M . was John
 a M . was friend John .
 friend M . a John . was
 was . John . M a friend
 . was friend John . M a
 was . a John . friend M
 was . friend a . M John
 M John . was . a friend
 M was friend a John . .
 . John a friend M was .
 friend was M . John a .
 . M . was John a friend
 a . . was M friend John
 M John . . friend was a
 a M . friend was . John
SCHEDULE 
AMENDMENT TO THE CONSTITUTION OF CANADA 
CONSTITUTION ACT, 1867 
The Constitution Act, 1867, is amended by adding, immediately after section 93, the following: 
"93A. 
Paragraphs (1) to (4) of section 93 do not apply to Quebec." 
CITATION 
2. This Amendment may be cited as the Constitution Amendment (year of proclamation) (Quebec).  
The special joint committee on which I have the honour to sit was given the mandate of studying the proposed amendment to section 93. 
Today, we have before us the resolution to amend section 93 of the Constitution Act, 1867.  
Briefly put, I support this resolution. 
I am also convinced that the majority of Catholic parents in Quebec who enjoy the guarantees provided under section 93 support this amendment, as do the majority of Protestant parents, who are in the same situation.  
However, the Quebec National Assembly will no longer be subject to legislation predating Confederation with respect to denominational instruction.  
These laws of Quebec that predate Confederation and concern Catholic and Protestant denominational schools have led to the creation of an unusual system, which gave Catholic and Protestant parents different rights, according to where they lived in the province.  
Catholic and Protestant school boards are thus to be found protected by the Constitution within the old limits of Montreal and Quebec City. 
Elsewhere in the province the Catholic school boards are not protected by the Constitution, except in predominantly Protestant districts, where Catholic parents are in the minority.  
Outside Montreal and Quebec City, the Constitution protects Protestant school boards if, in a district with a Catholic majority, the Protestant parents are in the minority.  
Honourable senators, educational reform has been a concern of Quebec governments for over 30 years. 
And one of the subjects that keeps coming back, since the publication of the Parent report in the 1960s, is the establishment of school boards on the basis of Canada's two official languages. 
The ongoing challenge was to reconcile linguistic school boards with the constitutional guarantee protecting Catholic and Protestant school boards in Montreal and Quebec City. 
 M . was a friend .
 a John . . M friend
 M friend was . a John
 . was John . friend a
He was a colleague I could rely on for advice, wisdom, a wealth of experience, a diverting or entertaining anecdote, or simply his warmth, his cheerful spirit and his camaraderie. 
 He , a of warmth a anecdote or his experience a was for , wealth simply his spirit I , colleague entertaining camaraderie , diverting and cheerful on or , advice could his wisdom rely .
 on a simply , wisdom , spirit a anecdote and his for I of warmth experience colleague a wealth was his , camaraderie He his entertaining advice or , rely . cheerful or diverting could ,
 wisdom . colleague his and , a a diverting , for a on spirit I , warmth of could entertaining his wealth , was or simply his He or experience anecdote , cheerful advice camaraderie rely
 on colleague camaraderie a was could or simply his his wisdom and . diverting , He experience warmth advice , anecdote entertaining his spirit , of or a for rely cheerful I , , wealth a
 or could a and I anecdote a for his wisdom camaraderie . entertaining colleague rely cheerful was on simply his experience warmth of diverting , his , spirit advice or wealth , , a , He
 advice , rely a his , I and his his wisdom , or , camaraderie for , colleague spirit a was experience He wealth of on cheerful diverting a warmth simply entertaining or anecdote . could
 his a or spirit I his his , or , He was . could simply advice anecdote , a experience colleague camaraderie , warmth and rely for a cheerful , wealth wisdom of diverting on entertaining
 camaraderie a and . spirit wealth or anecdote for a his , a wisdom simply experience warmth entertaining , on I cheerful or was , his He , his advice could of colleague , rely diverting
 wealth warmth I of a could , anecdote entertaining or camaraderie cheerful or colleague advice a rely for He diverting on his was . his simply and , experience , , a his wisdom , spirit
 He could or on of a colleague , , camaraderie warmth experience I rely spirit cheerful simply entertaining his wisdom his , , advice was for anecdote . or and , a diverting his a wealth
 his a , for wealth his of experience a entertaining was . camaraderie spirit wisdom his colleague , on or , cheerful He diverting , a , could advice rely and simply I anecdote or warmth
 a , warmth advice He on , or diverting wisdom a and anecdote . wealth experience was or entertaining his , cheerful a , simply colleague spirit his of for could rely , his camaraderie I
 his anecdote , on wealth rely for was camaraderie colleague simply wisdom and his diverting spirit , warmth of advice or experience a his , could a , He or a , cheerful . I entertaining
 a of cheerful , simply rely entertaining or his warmth and He wisdom for his , I , on a or anecdote experience his advice , was colleague , camaraderie a diverting spirit could wealth .
 warmth a on simply his advice of and a wealth could experience , , rely He I entertaining , . diverting a anecdote for camaraderie cheerful was , wisdom , colleague his or or his spirit
 diverting , spirit a experience , entertaining , , his camaraderie I wealth or simply for anecdote rely and could his of a colleague on his was , He or wisdom cheerful warmth . advice a
In other words, good management started once the government was no longer involved.  
So, we should be cautious before giving the public sector increased responsibilities for the management of funds. 
We must be careful before transferring money from the private to the public sector.  
Let us now look at the impact of the plan on jobs.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Your 15 minutes are up. 
Is leave granted to continue, honourable senators?  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
Senator Bolduc :
Honourable senators, clearly, we will be increasing the cost of jobs for businesses, and the cost of work for individuals. 
How can another payroll tax be positive for the creation of jobs? 
I would like an answer to this good question.  
Another question concerns the interprovincial competition that can be expected. 
It is obvious that the provinces which used to benefit from preferential rates from the federal fund will pay the going price in future. 
They will borrow, but at a higher rate. 
The increase in debt servicing costs will inflate each province's budget.  
As far as business investment is concerned, will the populations of the provinces agree to have their savings used for businesses in other provinces at the expense of their own? 
Will the provincial governments be tempted to influence the investment board to serve their interests? 
A moment ago I said that when a government agency, a public office, is created, there is a risk of politicizing the process.  
 He was a colleague I could rely on for advice , wisdom , a wealth of experience , a diverting or entertaining anecdote , or simply his warmth his cheerful spirit and his camaraderie .
 a for , wisdom and He his diverting his wealth rely or his could , entertaining colleague I spirit or was anecdote experience , on warmth , of a advice camaraderie , simply cheerful .
 a wisdom camaraderie could . cheerful , simply spirit wealth his a experience rely his warmth , on advice , or diverting his for He a and or was of I colleague , anecdote entertaining
 of or for a spirit rely , simply his diverting colleague . on or He , his entertaining cheerful a camaraderie a anecdote wealth I , wisdom experience warmth and , was could advice his
I shall miss him.  
 I him shall miss .
 miss I . him shall
 miss I . shall him
 him I shall . miss
 I shall him miss .
 miss I him shall .
 him shall . I miss
 him . miss shall I
 miss I him . shall
 . miss him shall I
 him I . shall miss
 miss shall I him .
 . him I shall miss
 him I . shall miss
 I shall miss him .
 miss . him I shall
Access to public funding in Quebec for denominational education remains available in Quebec. 
I find it hard to believe how the Province of Quebec in the future, even if the notwithstanding clauses are removed, would not continue to fund denominational training. 
Whether it is through a charter school, a public school system, or through a publicly funded private school system, denominational training to all groups, in my view, will continue in the province of Quebec for the foreseeable future.  
Since we are projecting the future, that is my prediction for the future.  
I wish to mention yet another aspect of the testimony referred to in the Reform Party opinion which is appended to the report.  
At the last minute, after all the testimony was taken, the Reform members of the committee introduced a long petition containing thousands of names objecting to the federal resolution. 
Every opportunity was presented for these voices to be heard during the course of the hearings. 
We did not deny them an opportunity to be heard. 
On the other hand, we were not given an opportunity by the Reform Party to cross-examine those petitioners or to decide what weight, if any, we should give to their petition.  
I concluded, honourable senators, that the overwhelming evidence was that the majority of the minorities affected by these rights and privilege were in favour of the amendments.  
The Roman Catholic Archbishops of Quebec and the Anglican Archbishop have letters on record in which they clearly indicate they did not oppose the amendment.  
I want to read those letters into the record because they are important.  
A different situation exists in Quebec. 
Nevertheless, our assembly did not oppose the choice to amend section 93. 
It has always been our conviction that the choice of means is the responsibility of the political authorities.  
They did not oppose.  
The Anglican Archbishop, Archbishop Andrew S. Hutchison, said the following at paragraph 2 of his letter dated November 3: 
The amendments proposed to Article 93 by the Quebec government, which would remove the obligation for the Quebec government to have confessional school boards, seems reasonable to us and in keeping with traditional positions enunciated by the Anglican church.  
Honourable senators, the senior representatives of the mainstream Roman Catholic and Protestant groups did not register their opposition to these changes. 
This does not mean that this exercise was one of perfection. 
 I shall miss him
 . I him miss
 . him miss I
 him . shall I
The Hon. the Acting Speaker :
 The Acting Speaker . Hon : the
 the The . Hon : Acting Speaker
 : . The the Hon Acting Speaker
 Hon Acting : the The . Speaker
 : Speaker Hon . the Acting The
 . Acting the The : Speaker Hon
 Speaker the : Hon The . Acting
 Speaker : the . The Acting Hon
 . Acting The Speaker the : Hon
 the . Hon : Acting Speaker The
 . the The Hon Acting : Speaker
 Hon The Speaker the : . Acting
 Acting The Hon : Speaker . the
 the Speaker Acting Hon The : .
 Hon The . the Speaker : Acting
 : Acting . The Speaker Hon the
That is a sentiment which was trumpeted ad nauseum by government supporters following the adoption of the resolution in the other place. 
It is a sentiment which is certainly not shared by members of the Quebec government. 
Constitutional amendments affect all Canadians, even if their immediate impact is felt in only one region of the country. 
They must not be treated lightly, particularly as they affect minorities. 
The federation's value lies in this country's historic respect for the individuality of minorities and for their desire not to have this individuality crushed by the numerical weight of the majority.  
What we are being asked to do in the final analysis is remove constitutionally guaranteed rights, as discriminatory as they may be by today's standards, and entrust them to a province which will honour them for a given period, with no guarantee that they will be incorporated on a permanent basis. 
The National Assembly has endorsed this unanimously, as did most witnesses who stayed with the issue, with varying degrees of enthusiasm. 
Prominent legal experts even argued that various Supreme Court decisions have interpreted section 93 in such a way that it has lost much of its significance.  
All this may be true, but there are still Quebecers who feel that by adopting the resolution they will be abandoned by the very Parliament whose responsibility it is to protect them.  
I wish to end my remarks by quoting from an opinion which was given to the Quebec government by what is known as the Catholic Committee of the Education Council of the province of Quebec, a consultative body which is asked to give its views on issues affecting the Catholic religion in schools. 
This opinion was written and delivered following the hearings of the joint committee. 
It is very pertinent that we are all aware of them.  
I wish to quote from four paragraphs, and I am not quoting them out of context, as the sentiment in the four paragraphs I will quote reflect the tone of the entire paper. 
The implications of the constitutional amendment requested by the Quebec government are not easy to interpret or measure accurately. 
Concerns and objections have been expressed, particularly by the English Catholic and French Protestant minorities. 
Experts in constitutional law have said that the amendment could have a surprising impact, far beyond the limited effects usually referred to in the media. 
The public may have trouble grasping the real scope of what is happening or making its views known because it does not have access to the necessary information and means of communication. 
It must therefore be acknowledged that if Parliament grants the request, public support for the amendment is less certain than support for the creation of linguistic school boards....  
Bill 109 - 
- which is the Quebec Education Act passed in June - 
 The Hon . Acting Speaker :
 Speaker the The . Hon Acting
 the Hon The . Speaker Acting
 : Hon the The . Speaker
Honourable senators, if there are no further tributes to the late Honourable Senator Macdonald, I would ask you to rise with me to observe one minute of silence out of respect for our departed colleague.  
 , Honourable , if of ask late no tributes to of . Macdonald Honourable our silence Senator one senators me with further I there out minute to for to are respect departed observe rise you colleague the would
 Honourable one me Senator Honourable , of would . the to I with observe minute are late you to out senators for ask colleague of tributes no there respect rise departed further if , our to silence Macdonald
 there observe Macdonald rise to ask if are you . one our silence no for Honourable of me I Honourable , colleague the senators with minute of further out to late tributes departed , Senator would to respect
 rise there tributes Macdonald if with no silence out Honourable . further our colleague ask of departed senators you the late respect me for one to of are , , to Senator minute would Honourable to I observe
 Honourable no one with me observe to you . Senator , there would I if to ask , tributes our departed silence Macdonald for rise are of respect to of senators further minute colleague late out Honourable the
 for our the further senators tributes there to rise to ask would , with silence Honourable of are , Honourable one if colleague . observe you late no to out minute Macdonald me of respect I Senator departed
 senators respect to if the of you late our Senator departed Honourable would with colleague are to , observe , to no rise minute ask one silence further for me out there tributes of . Honourable Macdonald I
 our out silence colleague respect one you if of are I observe to to Macdonald the Honourable . of me Senator no ask further , senators to Honourable would for departed there minute tributes late rise with ,
 departed . minute , , are observe one rise the to with tributes you our Honourable Senator me out there would of Honourable to if to silence I of further for respect ask senators colleague late Macdonald no
 our there minute to respect rise with of to Honourable colleague senators the out , you Honourable departed no Macdonald . would of silence late are one further tributes , ask me for to Senator observe I if
 observe to rise the silence you Honourable departed , , our minute I no respect colleague . for to senators with are there Senator of of further me ask Honourable late to tributes if Macdonald one out would
 silence of no if to . colleague Senator Honourable to with minute are ask you of departed observe Honourable further there respect one the I tributes , for late me Macdonald our , rise would senators out to
 Honourable me Senator late to respect . tributes departed would silence if I with the Honourable , further one minute , rise Macdonald colleague are you of observe senators to our of there ask out no for to
 our respect , to of of departed the , ask would late Honourable senators if with are you tributes further I minute . no for colleague to there Senator rise one observe silence Honourable to out Macdonald me
 no rise if for I you to minute late our of senators me the . , departed out Senator observe further Honourable to would ask to tributes are Macdonald of with silence Honourable colleague one respect , there
 to out late senators to Senator silence . I , the colleague are respect Macdonald for you to Honourable Honourable one , with of further rise our would no tributes ask minute there observe if of me departed
They were, as were most people, in favour of linguistic boards, but when it came to the abrogation of section 93, not only were they not in accord with that when they appeared before our committee, they even wrote to us to reconfirm their disagreement with the abrogation of section 93. 
However, Senator Grafstein has said that both the French-speaking Protestants and the English-speaking Catholics were certainly not in agreement, although they were in agreement with linguistic boards.  
It is not only the minority of the majority, in terms of the French-speaking Protestants, but also Alliance Québec that was in disagreement with this.  
I should like to raise many other points but, in view of the time, I will stop there.  
Senator Grafstein :
Honourable senators, I would refer my colleague to the transcript. 
Read the transcript. 
If there is a dispute about evidence, rather than taking my word or that of the honourable senator opposite - with whom I do disagree - senators should read the transcript. 
The transcript will speak for itself.  
Senator Lavoie-Roux :
I think all senators would have wanted to read the transcript, but we did not have enough time.  
The minister appeared before the committee on November 4. I asked him if he felt that minorities would be as well protected by section 23 of the Charter as they were by section 93 of the Constitution, and he said that they would not be as well protected.  
Senator Grafstein :
He and I have a different viewpoint on section 23(1)( a ) of the Charter.  
Hon. Dalia Wood :
Honourable senators, I have a question for the honourable senator.  
I do not agree with the concept of my honourable friend's consensus. 
Le Fédération des comités des parents de la province de Québec is a group mandated by the National Assembly to represent all parents and all schools in Quebec. 
They appeared before the committee. 
The president, Mr. Gary Stronach, when asked if the membership was aware, stated - and this is in his letter - that he did not ask his membership for their views. 
 Honourable senators , if there are further tributes to the late Honourable Senator Macdonald , I would ask you to rise with me to observe one minute of silence out of respect for our departed colleague .
 to departed one colleague Honourable our further to I observe you silence minute out Senator would me there of no respect , with ask , of . senators to Honourable Macdonald are the tributes for rise if
 our you observe Honourable , ask are Senator no of colleague for silence rise senators I there to late . departed further Macdonald , with tributes of if me respect minute to the would to Honourable one
 our Senator no ask I of rise for one of tributes . silence you minute me departed senators observe would late colleague respect are with Honourable if , Honourable to , there to out the to further
Honourable senators then stood in silent tribute.  
 senators stood silent Honourable then in tribute .
 then tribute in silent Honourable . senators stood
 silent . in senators Honourable then stood tribute
 . Honourable stood silent in senators then tribute
 . tribute silent stood senators Honourable in then
 senators tribute then silent Honourable stood in .
 silent . in then tribute senators stood Honourable
 senators silent . stood Honourable then tribute in
 senators stood in silent Honourable . tribute then
 in Honourable tribute senators stood then silent .
 then in tribute silent senators stood Honourable .
 senators Honourable tribute . silent stood in then
 silent Honourable then senators . in stood tribute
 senators tribute then Honourable stood silent . in
 silent senators stood tribute . then in Honourable
 then in tribute silent senators . Honourable stood
When you put all of that together, over time, Canadians, and particularly our youth, will say that enough is enough. 
You cannot have high EI premiums or high taxation through high EI premiums to pay your deficit down; then jack up your rates on the Canada Pension Plan; and then modify the OAS and GIS such that people receive reduced payouts, because you are hitting the same generation. 
You have bought off the seniors, and you are hitting the kids. 
They will not forget that.  
On October 30, Senator Tkachuk asked the following: 
Why is the government trying to fix the CPP by hitting hardest those least able to afford it?...  
Could the Leader of the Government in the Senate prevail upon his colleague the Minister of Finance to have his officials produce information showing the impact of the freeze in the earnings exemption for different ranges of income?  
For example, could data be prepared showing how much the freeze will benefit the government from those earning income below the poverty line relative to their family income, and how much it will save those with incomes above the poverty line relative to their total income?  
In other words, it is and will be perceived as another tax.  
On November 5, Senator Oliver said: 
They are increasing it by one month per year to give people time to adjust to the new reality of that retirement age. 
In effect, that will keep things in relative control.  
It should have been explained to Canadians that the government explored that method and rejected it for specific reasons. 
As others have said before me, people are living longer. 
While the age of 65 was formerly not achieved by many, it is being achieved by most today. 
That should be taken into consideration as a basis for increasing the age for retirement because it will decrease the burden on the young people who today believe that they will have to pay the whole shot for us.  
Senator Oliver continued: 
Honourable senators, in these times of slowing real incomes, increasing long-term interest rates, high personal taxes, increased CPP premiums, and ridiculously high EI premiums, where does the Leader of the Government believe that Canadians, who will receive less money from public plans, will find money to put away in their RRSPs to secure their own retirements?  
On November 6, Senator Oliver asked: 
Honourable senators, in 1995, the Department of Finance conducted a study on the impact of the increase in CPP premiums between 1986 and 1995. 
 Honourable senators then in silent tribute .
 tribute Honourable stood senators then in silent
 . stood senators then in silent Honourable
 . stood then in silent senators Honourable
The Late Honourable Pietro Rizzuto 
 Pietro Rizzuto Late The Honourable
 Pietro Honourable The Late Rizzuto
 Rizzuto The Honourable Late Pietro
 Pietro Honourable Late Rizzuto The
 Pietro The Late Honourable Rizzuto
 Late Rizzuto Honourable Pietro The
 Rizzuto Pietro Honourable The Late
 Pietro Late The Honourable Rizzuto
 The Pietro Honourable Late Rizzuto
 The Honourable Late Rizzuto Pietro
 Rizzuto Honourable Pietro The Late
 Pietro Late Rizzuto Honourable The
 Honourable Rizzuto The Pietro Late
 Late Pietro Rizzuto The Honourable
 The Late Rizzuto Pietro Honourable
 Pietro Honourable Rizzuto Late The
Meeting held in Luxembourg-Report of Canadian Section Tabled 
Hon. Pierre De Bané :
Honourable senators, pursuant to rule 23(6) of the Senate, I have the honour to present, in both official languages, the reports of the Canadian section of the International Assembly of French-Speaking Parliamentarians as well as the financial report of the 23rd regular session of the IAFSP and its executive committee, held in Luxembourg from July 7 to July 10, 1997.  
Foreign Affairs 
Committee Authorized to Meet During Sitting of the Senate 
Hon. John B. Stewart :
Honourable senators, with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58(1)( a ), I move: 
That the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs have power to sit at 3:15 p.m. tomorrow, Wednesday, December 10, even though the Senate may then be sitting, and that rule 95(4) be suspended in relation thereto.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is leave granted, honourable senators?  
Hon. Noël A. Kinsella (Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition) :
Honourable senators, in the past two years or so, there has been a common understanding in this chamber that Wednesdays would constitute a short day. 
This is why we have been meeting at 1:30 p.m. The general understanding is that we try to finish our business in the chamber by about 3:30 p.m. 
In the past few weeks, we have heard requests like the one raised by the Honourable Senator Stewart. 
If the request speaks to a Tuesday or a Thursday, when we normally meet at 2 p.m. and sit a little longer, there would be no difficulty, all things being equal, in granting leave. 
However, I am having some difficulty in granting leave for a day when we are supposed to be having a short day in any event.  
I would ask the honourable Chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee if he would explain his motion in light of the fact that Wednesday is a short day.  
Senator Stewart :
Honourable senators, there are two points:
First, we are hoping tomorrow to have a timely assessment of the achievements of the APEC meetings.  
 The Late Honourable Pietro
 The Honourable Late Pietro
 The Rizzuto Late Pietro
 Pietro Honourable Late Rizzuto
Tributes 
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
 Tributes
Honourable senators, I wish to address my question to the Leader of the Government in the Senate. 
It dates back to October 1, 1997, to a question asked at that time by Senator Meighen, which is only 51 days ago.  
I will quote Senator Meighen, who said: 
It has been 51 days!  
On November 25, I said the following: 
In a paper released the week prior to November 25, the Association of Canadian Pension Management said that the Seniors Benefit will stifle savings. 
To quote from their paper: 
Middle-income Canadians might simply decide to supplement government programs through the accumulation of non-income producing capital, such as homes or interest-free mortgages for their children. 
They may simply avoid retirement savings plans that generate heavily taxed income...  
They go on to suggest that Ottawa structure the Seniors Benefit in such a way that it will not result in an effective tax rate in excess of 50 per cent.  
Was the government listening when I asked that question? 
Senator Graham said, "Of course, yes." 
Did the Leader of the Government in the Senate read The Financial Post editorial that morning in which it was recommended that this problem be changed to reflect such an issue? 
From what I understand, in the other place all amendments have been struck down and no further amendments are coming forward. 
As we know, no amendments were passed.  
Changes to pension legislation represents one of the largest issues facing seniors as they move into retirement. 
Seniors, as a whole, do not know about these changes. 
Has the government developed a communications plan to inform Canadians of this issue prior to the passage of this bill? 
To that inquiry, Senator Graham replied, "Yes." 
He also said that this was a matter to which I had referred before, and that there are 1-800 lines available. 




Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
 Graham : . B Government . ( of Hon Leader ) Alasdair the
 Hon of : the ) Leader Government . Graham . Alasdair ( B
 Government . Alasdair the of ( : Graham . Leader Hon ) B
 B the ( of Graham Government Alasdair . Hon Leader . : )
 . : ( the ) of Graham Alasdair B Government Leader . Hon
 Graham . of ) . Leader : the Government Hon Alasdair ( B
 Government B the Hon ( Alasdair Graham . : of ) Leader .
 Alasdair ( ) the Graham . Hon . Government : of B Leader
 : Graham Hon . Leader B the Alasdair ) Government of ( .
 . Government B ) Hon of Graham : ( Leader . the Alasdair
 Government . Leader . Alasdair the of : B ) ( Graham Hon
 of Government the Leader Hon ) Graham . ( : . B Alasdair
 the ( ) Hon of B Leader Alasdair Government Graham . . :
 Leader Government the Hon of ( ) : Alasdair B . . Graham
 Government Leader : Alasdair of ) Graham . Hon B the . (
 Graham of Hon : Leader Government ) . the ( . Alasdair B
Senator Graham :
The will of Quebecers to leave must be clearly expressed. 
In addition, of course, any process that would lead to secession must respect the law.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
What does the law say on secession?  
Senator Graham :
The government has asked the Supreme Court of Canada to rule on the legality of unilateral secession.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
I had thought that Mr. Dion answered that question himself on the weekend when he said that a UDI would be illegal.  
Senator Nolin :
The Prime Minister has said he was prepared to negotiate. 
The Leader of the Government in the Senate has said the government is not prepared to negotiate.  
This morning, the Quebec minister of intergovernmental affairs, Mr. Brassard, said, and I quote: 
This is what we have always said.  
Bear in mind that this minister is a separatist. 
I repeat what he said: 
This is what we have always said.  
Mr. Chrétien has acknowledged that the federal government would negotiate. 
Could the Leader of the Government in the Senate tell us under what authority the Prime Minister could negotiate?  
Senator Graham :
 Hon . B . Alasdair ( Leader of the Government ) :
 : of Government the Graham Alasdair B . ( ) Leader Hon
 Alasdair Graham : Hon the B of Leader Government . ) .
 : Alasdair B ( of . Leader ) Hon the Graham .
Honourable senators, when I think of the passing of our esteemed colleague Senator Pietro Rizzuto, I think of the conversation which ensued between a few of Andrew Jackson's friends at the time of his death. 
 friends between senators conversation . when esteemed of , , I Rizzuto his the the Senator the I few time a our of ' death think Honourable Andrew which of of passing at colleague ensued of s think Pietro Jackson
 colleague the a passing Jackson few of Rizzuto think Pietro time senators of s conversation of which . when of Senator Honourable of Andrew friends death , , our I between think esteemed ensued I the his ' at the
 his time esteemed , between friends conversation a when death s Pietro Senator Rizzuto Jackson at , the think colleague . which our ensued the Honourable of few think senators of of of the Andrew ' I I passing of
 of think few . passing a of at death our the Andrew when Rizzuto senators Senator , , I conversation Pietro Honourable of ' colleague of friends I ensued time think his the esteemed s Jackson the which between of
 between Rizzuto the , at of the few ' which senators think Jackson I his the esteemed a conversation Honourable passing when death of . time Senator of , Andrew s I colleague Pietro of our friends of ensued think
 conversation ensued at death think passing Rizzuto senators Pietro of which few of friends I our of the I Senator between think time his . ' the Honourable esteemed the a of , colleague when Andrew s of Jackson ,
 of his . Pietro the esteemed at colleague which between Senator I conversation ensued passing death think when think our of Rizzuto time a of Andrew s few , Jackson ' friends the I , of Honourable of the senators
 the Andrew of of few of think colleague of I at ' ensued death Rizzuto Honourable passing his friends Jackson , Senator s which between think conversation our the the Pietro senators , time . of a when I esteemed
 Honourable the of Pietro the of of think passing s which few think of time friends at the conversation between Jackson of I . our I a Rizzuto when esteemed Andrew senators Senator ensued , ' his , death colleague
 esteemed of of I which when ' a the think at think few the time of our colleague of Honourable Senator passing his of the conversation ensued s Pietro Andrew . , Jackson Rizzuto death , between I senators friends
 the , of friends think a s passing of at colleague Honourable death esteemed time few think which senators , conversation when Pietro of Jackson the ' Rizzuto his I between . our of the Senator ensued I Andrew of
 Pietro I , the time his of Rizzuto of the Andrew ' passing a , of Senator ensued few at s think our colleague which think of esteemed friends the senators I Honourable death Jackson conversation between . when of
 ' death ensued at his of . conversation the Pietro Rizzuto Senator the our which , few the , s time think Andrew I colleague think of when friends esteemed between senators of of of Jackson I a Honourable passing
 the of of Andrew senators colleague conversation death , at passing Senator which time between a think Rizzuto when . of of our s the Honourable , of I I Jackson friends Pietro esteemed few the his ' think ensued
 Rizzuto our passing death conversation esteemed s colleague , of a when the think ' senators few Jackson of , Senator between of which the I of ensued I Pietro Honourable his time friends . the at Andrew think of
 Jackson between . I a the I , few when which Rizzuto senators death Honourable colleague Andrew of , of ensued the ' our esteemed think of conversation think Senator at of passing the time friends of his Pietro s
Honourable senators, my honourable friend would be the first to recognize that it is not appropriate for me to comment on any discussions that took place in cabinet this morning. 
Hon. Lowell Murray :
Would it be appropriate for the honourable minister to let us know whether it was considered last week?  
Senator Graham :
The matter of the helicopters is under active consideration by the government.  
Cabinet met last Thursday. 
Senator Forrestall :
If that is the last cabinet meeting before the Christmas break, I gather we will not see any decision until sometime in the new year.  
Senator Graham :
If that is a question, I would hope my honourable friend is wrong, and that I am correct in saying that it is to be hoped that there will be a decision before the end of this year.  
Senator Forrestall :
Cabinet will meet again, then. 
I am pleased to hear that.  
Search and Rescue Helicopter Replacement Program-State of Sea King Helicopter Fleet-Government Position 
Hon. J. Michael Forrestall :
Where are the other six? 
Are they on ships at sea? 
We have 30 in the inventory.  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, the answer is yes, there are 30 helicopters in the inventory. 
 Honourable senators , when I think of the passing of our esteemed colleague Senator Pietro Rizzuto , I think of the conversation which ensued between a few of Andrew Jackson s friends at the time of his death .
 a between the at think ' which Andrew his Senator , time I friends the the of of colleague think when Rizzuto , of Pietro . senators of ensued conversation Honourable I our esteemed of Jackson s passing few
 think think death Senator his the our of esteemed ensued when ' friends Pietro I at of of of colleague Rizzuto passing . a Honourable Andrew , the of s time Jackson conversation , which I the senators few
 , ' the our . Pietro of esteemed think Senator Andrew when of the a of Rizzuto few passing , at ensued his friends Jackson I between time senators think I the of s which Honourable death conversation colleague
One friend asked the other if he thought the former President of the United States would go to heaven. 
 heaven friend thought he would the other to former States asked the the United President One of if go .
 if go of other former States . the heaven to asked the would President he friend the One United thought
 to if thought he go the United the other States would former of heaven President asked friend . the One
 if other United friend of asked he . would heaven the to former the go States One the President thought
 heaven thought States President other United friend the the he go the asked to . of if former would One
 thought to of he United other the . One go States would the if President the asked former friend heaven
 to if asked President the One thought United States he go the of the . friend former would heaven other
 he States would go asked One to the the thought friend United the former if heaven of other President .
 asked thought if States . President would go the One the he United friend former other the heaven of to
 President friend States thought heaven would One asked to the the former he . go other if of United the
 asked President States to if friend the other he former the the of heaven go United thought . One would
 go the President States former United the One friend would asked to he . the of heaven if other thought
 go heaven would other the the friend . One asked to thought States the he if of President United former
 friend thought the to heaven President . United One other the asked the he States of if former would go
 go the he . friend other One if thought the would heaven to of the United President States former asked
 United thought the friend One heaven President he would go States the the . of asked former other to if
On motion of Senator Kinsella, for Senator Simard, debate adjourned.  
Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration 
Sixth Report of Committee Adopted 
The Senate proceeded to consideration of the sixth report of the Standing Committee on Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration (budgets for certain committees), presented in the Senate on December 4, 1997.  
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, I move, on behalf of Senator Rompkey, the adoption of this report.  
Motion agreed to and report adopted.  
Telecommunications Act Teleglobe Canada Reorganization and Divestiture Act 
Bill to Amend-First Reading 
The Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C-17, to amend the Telecommunications Act and the Teleglobe Canada Reorganization and Divestiture Act. 
Bill read first time.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this bill be read the second time?  
On motion of Senator Carstairs, bill placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading on Thursday, December 11, 1997.  
Canada Marine Bill 
First Reading 
The Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C-9, for making the system of Canadian ports competitive, efficient and commercially oriented, providing for the establishing of port authorities and the divesting of certain harbours and ports, for the commercialization of the St. Lawrence Seaway and ferry services and other matters related to maritime trade and transport and amending the Pilotage Act and amending and repealing other Acts as a consequence.  
Bill read first time.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this bill be read the second time?  
 One friend asked the other if he thought the former President of United States would go to heaven .
 would States friend other United the to he President go thought asked the . former One if heaven the
 thought heaven friend One the would other President to the former States . if the of asked he United
 friend he the to would States other go United . former President of the the thought if asked One
"He will if he wants to," was the response. 
 response . will wants ," if " was He he the to
 the he ," wants to will . response He if was "
 if was wants he . will ," " the response He to
 will the to . " was ," if response He wants he
 . if he ," " will to response was He wants the
 response " . ," the will if he to wants was He
 was if " response ," . wants he to will the He
 " wants will was He ," to . he response if the
 He will to response . the if " was wants ," he
 wants if to the " will he . He was response ,"
 wants . ," will the if to " was He response he
 " the will wants to ," He if . response he was
 will was the response wants to he . ," " He if
 " the wants . He ," response he to will was if
 " response the to he wants He will ," if . was
 to was if the wants ," will " . response He he
I think all senators would have wanted to read the transcript, but we did not have enough time.  
The minister appeared before the committee on November 4. I asked him if he felt that minorities would be as well protected by section 23 of the Charter as they were by section 93 of the Constitution, and he said that they would not be as well protected.  
Senator Grafstein :
He and I have a different viewpoint on section 23(1)( a ) of the Charter.  
Hon. Dalia Wood :
Honourable senators, I have a question for the honourable senator.  
I do not agree with the concept of my honourable friend's consensus. 
Le Fédération des comités des parents de la province de Québec is a group mandated by the National Assembly to represent all parents and all schools in Quebec. 
They appeared before the committee. 
The president, Mr. Gary Stronach, when asked if the membership was aware, stated - and this is in his letter - that he did not ask his membership for their views. 
He said that he did not ask the parents whether they were for or against the amendment to section 93.  
This is one of the largest groups in Quebec. 
If Mr. Stronach is part of the "for" or "against" theory, then there is a problem with the whole concept put forth by my honourable friend.  
My honourable friend spoke of the Estates General, but he did not refer to their minority report, which covered over 70 per cent of their membership. 
Why are my figures different from those of my honourable friend?  
Senator Grafstein :
Again, honourable senators, this is a question of evidence. 
I refer all senators to the transcript.  
I wish to speak specifically about the fact that we are dealing with elites as opposed to the groups they represent. 
We questioned these representatives during the hearings as to whether their underlying groups agreed with the position they had taken.  
 " He will if he wants ," was the response .
 He was will . response wants ," " he the if
 wants . to He if will " response the he was
 the " . was ," will if he He to response
He will if he wants to, with pure determination, energy and a dynamic heart, plus all the other exceptional qualities of a most exceptional man.  
 energy , plus if of a determination most a and qualities exceptional , dynamic . the wants exceptional all to other pure will , with he He man heart
 other exceptional he will dynamic , man determination to all plus exceptional a He with , energy a most if the . and qualities pure heart wants of ,
 dynamic plus other he to qualities most with a , of , heart wants , if He will exceptional energy determination the exceptional . a man pure and all
 plus other wants all dynamic , a of He qualities determination energy most man heart exceptional a he with will the exceptional , if . , and to pure
 pure and he a a exceptional will , heart He exceptional plus of wants to man . other , dynamic , with qualities if all determination energy most the
 exceptional and he to a a heart all dynamic the pure will , . wants , energy He man most other with if plus , exceptional of qualities determination
 all determination exceptional to qualities , dynamic plus will wants , man if other pure heart energy he exceptional of a with He the , . a most and
 heart He other a pure exceptional he man to energy , of a all wants . will exceptional plus with , most the qualities determination , if dynamic and
 with determination and exceptional , pure exceptional man of . most He other will a qualities , a energy the all to heart , he plus if wants dynamic
 heart energy and . a with a pure He , qualities plus other to of , dynamic man most he determination wants exceptional all exceptional will the if ,
 , all of pure exceptional most with exceptional , plus qualities energy other a determination . dynamic will wants heart he the man He if a to , and
 if other exceptional heart and , with he . qualities will , a dynamic the all He man a energy of plus wants to determination most , exceptional pure
 plus determination with the will if man . wants dynamic , exceptional , of he heart qualities most pure other to exceptional a He energy , and a all
 energy determination and all will he the of , dynamic other to exceptional , He most pure if . qualities a a exceptional wants , plus with man heart
 to qualities energy all a man determination other of most He dynamic with plus a if pure the . wants , and he heart exceptional will , , exceptional
 . all the heart he , a man exceptional wants and exceptional dynamic to energy most , a with determination other qualities plus of , if He will pure
Hon. Fernand Robichaud , for Senator Graham, rose pursuant to notice of Thursday, October 2, 1997: 
Whereas the Government of Quebec has indicated that it intends to establish French and English linguistic school boards in Quebec; 
and whereas the National Assembly of Quebec has passed a resolution authorizing an amendment to the Constitution of Canada; 
and whereas the National Assembly of Quebec has reaffirmed the established rights of the English-speaking community of Quebec, specifically the right, in accordance with the law of Quebec, of members of that community to have their children receive their instruction in English language educational facilities that are under the management and control of that community and are financed through public funds; 
and whereas section 23 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms guarantees to citizens throughout Canada rights to minority language instruction and minority language educational facilities under the management and control of linguistic minorities and provided out of public funds; 
and whereas section 43 of the Constitution Act, 1982 provides that an amendment to the Constitution of Canada may be made by proclamation issued by the Governor General under the Great Seal of Canada where so authorized by resolutions of the Senate and House of Commons and of the legislative assembly of each province to which the amendment applies; 
now therefore the Senate resolves that an amendment to the Constitution of Canada be authorized to be made by proclamation issued by His Excellency the Governor General under the Great Seal of Canada in accordance with the schedule hereto.  
SCHEDULE 
AMENDMENT TO THE CONSTITUTION OF CANADA 
CONSTITUTION ACT, 1867 
The Constitution Act, 1867, is amended by adding, immediately after section 93, the following: 
"93A. 
Paragraphs (1) to (4) of section 93 do not apply to Quebec." 
CITATION 
2. This Amendment may be cited as the Constitution Amendment (year of proclamation) (Quebec).  
The special joint committee on which I have the honour to sit was given the mandate of studying the proposed amendment to section 93. 
Today, we have before us the resolution to amend section 93 of the Constitution Act, 1867.  
Briefly put, I support this resolution. 
I am also convinced that the majority of Catholic parents in Quebec who enjoy the guarantees provided under section 93 support this amendment, as do the majority of Protestant parents, who are in the same situation.  
However, the Quebec National Assembly will no longer be subject to legislation predating Confederation with respect to denominational instruction.  
 He will if he wants to with pure determination , energy and a dynamic heart , plus all the other exceptional qualities of a most exceptional man .
 He heart he . a the , if with man plus exceptional dynamic of to pure qualities most wants all and , exceptional determination a energy , other
 , if dynamic the wants of He plus he exceptional all energy , , heart qualities pure a and a with other . man exceptional most will to
 will dynamic plus the with and , wants if to a exceptional other , pure heart a of man he energy most all determination . He exceptional qualities
Most of us know the story of Pietro's tireless spirit. 
 . know Pietro of story of spirit ' Most tireless the s us
 of spirit the . ' know us story s Most of tireless Pietro
 us the spirit Pietro tireless story Most s know ' of of .
 story tireless know s spirit Pietro of the us . of ' Most
 Most of know spirit s ' story Pietro . the us of tireless
 spirit s know . the us story Most of of Pietro ' tireless
 spirit . of s know the Most us story of Pietro tireless '
 tireless Pietro the of story spirit ' know us of . Most s
 story . of ' know Most the of tireless us s Pietro spirit
 ' story tireless Most Pietro the of s know us . of spirit
 know Most of of Pietro s us tireless story spirit . the '
 s of story the us of Most Pietro tireless spirit ' . know
 of . Pietro Most know of the s us tireless ' story spirit
 Most of . the s know Pietro ' spirit of story tireless us
 tireless s know the story Pietro . ' us of Most of spirit
 Most of us spirit story of the tireless . ' Pietro s know
The federal government cut its own spending earlier, more drastically and in greater measure than transfers to the provinces. 
The government has made it clear that it will use increased fiscal flexibility to make strategic investments in priority areas, and action was taken early and directly on that commitment based on favourable fiscal results that emerged this past spring.  
With respect to individual provinces, I do not have those numbers. 
However, I would be happy to provide them for my honourable friend.  
Senator Roberge :
Could the minister find out at the same time why, in the same time period, Ontario's share of the cash transfers will increase to $173 million?  
Senator Graham :
Yes. 
While I am doing that, I should like to remind the honourable senator that even before the federal government balances the books, it is putting more money into transfers to the provinces. 
In fact, the government is raising the cash floor from $11 billion to $12.5 billion, the single largest reinvestment made by the federal government. 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Provinces-Effect on Atlantic Provinces 
Hon. Mabel M. DeWare :
Honourable senators, my figures show that, four years ago, the provinces received more than $19 billion in cash transfers for health, education and welfare through what was then known as the Canadian Assistance Program and Established Programs Financing. 
The government's math provides some good news, as the original plan was to give them even less.  
The problem is that some provinces will get less under the new scheme while others will get more. 
Indeed, seven of the ten provinces will actually see their cash transfers fall even further, including all of Atlantic Canada.  
The cash transfer to Nova Scotia will fall from $427 million to $411 million, which is a difference of $16 million. 
The transfer for Prince Edward Island will fall from $60 million to $59 million, which is a reduction of $1 million. 
The cash transfer to Newfoundland will fall from $281 million to $251 million, which is a difference of $30 million. 
New Brunswick will lose $11 million. 
 Most of know the story of Pietro ' s tireless spirit .
 ' Most know spirit us Pietro story tireless the of of s
 s Pietro . Most of us tireless know of ' story the
 of story spirit Most of the tireless s . ' know Pietro
Born in Sicily in 1934, he came to Canada at the age of 20. 
 , age Born in to came the 20 Sicily of at 1934 . in Canada he
 of at , to age in in he came 20 Canada Born Sicily the . 1934
 at in 1934 Sicily , in age to Canada of 20 Born he . the came
 20 he Born Canada , the at in to Sicily came in 1934 . age of
 came 20 age in Canada Born the of to , he in . 1934 at Sicily
 in Sicily the Canada Born of , 20 to 1934 age . in came at he
 , the came at 1934 in to . of Sicily in Born age Canada 20 he
 Canada age , 1934 Sicily in the 20 of at to in . Born he came
 came in Sicily at age 20 Canada to , the 1934 Born in he . of
 age of he in 1934 in Born to 20 at , came Sicily Canada the .
 Canada of 20 1934 came the he , in at . Born age to in Sicily
 in . the of at he 1934 age in 20 came Canada to Born Sicily ,
 age he Sicily at in to in 1934 Born Canada of 20 the , came .
 1934 he in of to 20 Born , Sicily at Canada in . age came the
 at 20 to 1934 , . age the Born in of he Sicily came in Canada
 of age the he in in Sicily Born came 20 to . , Canada 1934 at
They will be inspected by December 18.  
Of the 24 that were inspected, only two were found to be in need of repair. 
As to precisely where the other six are located, I would need to consult with the appropriate authorities at National Defence. 
I will bring forward an answer for my honourable friend.  
Senator Forrestall :
Was there any criticism from our NATO allies with respect to the grounding of these aircraft? 
My understanding is that these aircraft are at sea, and a number of them are engaged in some training exercises. 
Were we criticized for not being able to live up to our obligations?  
Senator Graham :
Not to my knowledge. 
It is my understanding that those helicopters are at sea on exercises. 
As to precisely where they are, on whatever ocean, I cannot positively say. 
It might be a military secret, as a matter of fact.  
Federal-Provincial Relations 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Atlantic Provinces Equal to Increase in Social Transfers-Government Position 
Hon. Brenda M. Robertson :
Honourable senators, I have a supplementary that goes back to questions raised by the Honourable Senator DeWare. 
I will come back to this again tomorrow and the next day.  
I should like to know from the Leader of the Government in the Senate whether the cuts we discussed yesterday in the social transfer payments for Atlantic Canada represent the increases in the social transfers that were announced twice previously by this government? 
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
 Born Sicily in 1934 , he came to Canada at the age of 20 .
 1934 he Born . in Sicily , age the to Canada 20 in at came
 the 1934 20 age at to came Canada Born in in Sicily . of ,
 came age Sicily Born of at , Canada to the he 20 in in 1934
He shovelled snow. 
 He . snow shovelled
 He snow shovelled .
 He snow . shovelled
 snow . He shovelled
 He . shovelled snow
 He snow . shovelled
 shovelled snow He .
 snow shovelled He .
 snow shovelled . He
 . He snow shovelled
 He snow shovelled .
 . He shovelled snow
 He snow shovelled .
 shovelled He . snow
 He snow . shovelled
 He . snow shovelled
Retiring at age 65, dropping dead three to six years later, depending on your gender, was good for governments. 
At its inception in 1965 - payments started on January 1, 1967 - in order to be eligible for CPP benefits, you had to be 68, and 68 was about the same year that the average male died. 
It was the perfect pension plan:
Pay all your lives, and then die just as the first cheque is put into the mail. 
If there was a postal strike, the government had the benefit of both worlds - the pensioner was dead and the cheque was in the mail.  
From the beginning, the CPP was simple, but it was misnamed. 
It was misnamed because it is also a life insurance program. 
However, it is a silly program when it is part of a pension plan.  
Instead of cancelling the benefit, there is an argument made as to whether it should be means tested when cancelled or not. 
That is an area where we can save a lot of money because, as people are dying today, cheques are going out in the mail, at $3,500 a shot. 
Yet we do not have enough money to pay proper pensions when people are alive.  
It is also a disability program. 
There is nothing wrong with having a disability program, but it is part of the Canada Pension Plan now. 
It is part of a payroll tax to buy universal disability insurance, and then the social engineers took over.  
I want to give senators an historical perspective. 
There have been many amendments made over the years to the CPP. 
Yet, the government has said, "We will not touch that fund." 
However, they touched the other fund. 
Since 1973, they have been making new legislation and implementing new programs. 
Why will they not use the fund that will accumulate on the other side, over which Parliament has no control? 
 He snow .
 shovelled He snow
 He shovelled snow
 snow shovelled He
He paved roads. 
 paved roads . He
 . paved He roads
 paved He roads .
 paved roads . He
 . He paved roads
 paved roads He .
 roads paved . He
 . He paved roads
 He paved . roads
 He roads paved .
 . He paved roads
 . roads He paved
 paved He roads .
 roads He paved .
 paved . roads He
 paved roads He .
If that is a question, I would hope my honourable friend is wrong, and that I am correct in saying that it is to be hoped that there will be a decision before the end of this year.  
Senator Forrestall :
Cabinet will meet again, then. 
I am pleased to hear that.  
Search and Rescue Helicopter Replacement Program-State of Sea King Helicopter Fleet-Government Position 
Hon. J. Michael Forrestall :
Where are the other six? 
Are they on ships at sea? 
We have 30 in the inventory.  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, the answer is yes, there are 30 helicopters in the inventory. 
As I indicated yesterday, 24 were cleared, and six remain to be inspected. 
They will be inspected by December 18.  
Of the 24 that were inspected, only two were found to be in need of repair. 
As to precisely where the other six are located, I would need to consult with the appropriate authorities at National Defence. 
I will bring forward an answer for my honourable friend.  
Senator Forrestall :
Was there any criticism from our NATO allies with respect to the grounding of these aircraft? 
My understanding is that these aircraft are at sea, and a number of them are engaged in some training exercises. 
Were we criticized for not being able to live up to our obligations?  
 He paved .
 roads . He
 paved . roads
 . paved roads
Ultimately, he became the driving force behind a highly successful construction business in his beloved Laval. 
 he the Laval his behind in force , business a highly Ultimately successful beloved . construction driving became
 became successful , he behind beloved construction a Ultimately in driving business his . the Laval highly force
 force in construction successful he the a Ultimately driving business , Laval highly behind his . became beloved
 force behind he Laval successful became , his the driving beloved . business a construction Ultimately in highly
 he in became a force beloved construction highly , the behind . successful driving business his Laval Ultimately
 highly his successful Ultimately force the business a driving behind beloved . became he in , Laval construction
 a . business his successful construction he behind Laval Ultimately in beloved became driving force the , highly
 driving construction a the force his he beloved . became behind Laval business Ultimately highly , in successful
 business Laval , behind became . successful construction his he highly force a the driving beloved Ultimately in
 Ultimately highly successful driving a the , behind Laval his in force beloved . construction business became he
 Ultimately . highly successful the a business behind driving , his became he beloved Laval construction force in
 construction force behind successful became beloved highly business he a . in his Laval Ultimately , driving the
 in construction the became he . a driving successful Ultimately beloved force highly behind Laval his business ,
 construction . Laval driving force highly beloved he successful became his Ultimately behind the a , in business
 his , business force highly . a Ultimately behind beloved he became driving in construction the Laval successful
 driving force . the beloved behind Laval Ultimately he a in became successful highly his business construction ,
The dense history of the Quebec school question holds lessons for us all.  
Once appointed to the committee, I set about to better understand the tangled roots of history lying beneath this question, to digest as best I could the numerous articles, studies and especially reports commissioned by successive Quebec governments over the last few years ranging from the articulate Parent commission to the Kenniff report to the findings of the Estates General. 
It became evident to me that a deep and thorough consensus had developed for radical reformation, at least among the elites of Quebec. 
Claude Ryan, an old friend of mine and the then Minister of Education, had galvanized that reform process over a decade ago in Quebec. 
It was equally clear to me that the existing school structures were in desperate need of renovation, particularly in light of the overlapping school structures in Quebec and the financial restraints facing all governments.  
Rather than an historic essay, perhaps it would be simpler if I could share with you my thought processes and the evidence I found as a member of the Standing Senate Committee on the Quebec Resolution Requesting Constitutional Change.  
First, a brief word about committees and their work. 
There are, as all senators know, three committee structures in Parliament: the committees of the other place, our Senate committees - both special and standing - and the special joint and standing committees of the Senate and the House of Commons. 
I prefer Senate committees.  
Senate committees are less partisan, more thorough and more careful. 
Joint committees are a compromise, but I am confident that the Senate's practice of care and attention was, for the most part, adopted in the work of the special joint committee on the Quebec school question.  
It is true, as senators have pointed out, that the special joint committee was given a short time-frame to make its recommendations. 
However, committee members were assiduous in assuring all points of view were heard, unlike the Government of Quebec which chose not to have public hearings. 
This made our task doubly difficult.  
As senators, we are unlike any other evidence-gathering body. 
We gather evidence, we serve as our own advisors, seek our own counsel, we become judges, and we become the jury. 
We are the supreme court of the land when it comes to legislation. 
We must view the evidence before committees with care. 
I urge all senators, before they vote, to carefully review the full transcript of the evidence.  
Let me say at the outset that I was very sceptical, particularly after having read the Quebec resolution which was adopted unanimously in the Quebec Assembly, save for two abstentions, and which was quickly passed by the Quebec assembly requesting the federal government amend section 93 of the Constitution by deleting the subsections in so far as their application pertains to Quebec. 
 Ultimately , he became the force behind a highly successful construction business in his beloved Laval .
 successful , force his . became driving he a beloved business the Laval highly construction Ultimately behind
 his . in became force highly Laval beloved business , a construction driving successful the he behind
 driving became Ultimately highly beloved he in behind business . Laval force construction , successful a his
No task was too great; no contribution too much. 
 great too too task was ; . No no contribution much
 No too great much no too task ; . contribution was
 much no . great too ; too No was task contribution
 too task much No no too . was contribution ; great
 . too No task much was ; contribution no great too
 no contribution No ; much too great . task too was
 was . great No contribution ; too too no much task
 contribution great too much ; task . No no too was
 was no task contribution great too too ; No . much
 contribution was great no . too task much ; too No
 . no task too contribution No great was much too ;
 was . too ; No too contribution great task much no
 . no much great contribution too No too was task ;
 contribution No great too too was . much no task ;
 too ; great was much no contribution . No too task
 much ; No . was great too no contribution too task
Search and Rescue Helicopter Replacement Program-Possible Cabinet Discussion on Awarding Contract for Helicopter Purchase-Government Position 
Search and Rescue Helicopter Replacement Program-State of Sea King Helicopter Fleet-Government Position 
Federal-Provincial Relations 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Atlantic Provinces Equal to Increase in Social Transfers-Government Position 
Delayed Answers to Oral Questions 
Human Resources Development 
Changes to Canada Pension Plan-Accountability and Transparency of Investment Board-Undertaking to Publish Quarterly Financial Statements-Government Position 
Changes to Canada Pension Plan-Investment Board Not Subject to Access to Information Act-Government Position 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
Commemoration of Fiftieth Anniversary-Plans of Government 
Activities planned around December 10, 1997 for the launch of the 50th Anniversary commemorative year of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) 
National Defence 
Lack of Helicopter for Number of Navy Frigates-Government Position 
Forestry 
Demolition of Government Laboratories-Possibility of Restoration of Funding-Government Position 
Answers to Order Paper Questions Tabled 
Energy-Department of the Environment-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Energy-Department of Justice-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Energy-Department of Multiculturalism-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Energy-Department of Natural Resources-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
 task was too great ; no contribution too much .
 . was ; no much No too great too task
 contribution too . much task no was great too No
 . No ; was no task contribution too great too
He supported junior hockey, the Boy Scouts and the Optimist Club.  
 Scouts Club Boy , Optimist the . and He supported hockey junior the
 He . and Optimist Club the , junior supported hockey the Scouts Boy
 the Scouts Optimist hockey the and , He . junior Boy supported Club
 . junior and the , He the hockey Scouts Optimist Boy Club supported
 He the the Optimist supported . Scouts and , Boy hockey junior Club
 and the supported Boy Optimist hockey . junior Scouts the , He Club
 Scouts , Optimist the Club junior and hockey Boy the supported . He
 junior the the , Scouts supported and Boy . Club hockey He Optimist
 Scouts supported the Optimist , junior . Club He Boy and hockey the
 and Boy He hockey Scouts . junior , supported the Club the Optimist
 Optimist Scouts the Club junior Boy and He the hockey , . supported
 . the junior Club Scouts and the hockey , He supported Optimist Boy
 the hockey supported , and junior . Club Optimist He Scouts the Boy
 and the Club Boy . hockey junior the supported Optimist Scouts He ,
 . junior the the , supported Optimist He Club hockey and Scouts Boy
 Club Scouts Boy junior and hockey supported the the , He . Optimist
We should have a full evaluation of any changes to the Old Age Security system and how it will affect future incentives to save. 
The Auditor General should have free access not only to the fund but also to the board itself, lifting the limits on RRSP contributions so that people can have an opportunity to look after themselves, and removing the foreign investment restrictions on RRSP investments.  
Honourable senators, there are elements of truth in all things nefarious. 
That is why we call it propaganda. 
The government is an accomplished practitioner in this art of propaganda, with their plea to save the CPP and their prediction of dire consequences if action is not taken today, this minute. 
They made only token consultations. 
Invoking closure on the debate on Bill C-2 was the first indication of the government's intention. 
Now we are being told in the Senate by the government that it is important to act now because the Minister of Finance has an agreement with the provinces.  
The government's usual modus operandi is diversion, mixed with a little fabrication. 
It was convenient to have the diversion of a postal strike with its ensuing back-to-work legislation before the house while Bill C-2 was being introduced in the other place and closure was being imposed. 
It was also convenient for the government to falsely accuse the former prime minister of criminal intent and behaviour after its incompetence was fully exposed to the Canadian public following the Quebec referendum.  
It is not a question of means justifying the end. 
In this bill, the means and the end are equally wrong.  
Time allocation has been imposed seven times on other bills, most recently on third reading of Bill C-22, the Pearson airport bill. 
It was imposed on Bill C-110 which proposed certain constitutional amendments; on Bill C-12 which dealt with employment insurance; and on the committee report on Term 17. 
It is becoming a habit; a habit that is hard to break.  
Bill C-2 is just another in a series of bad bills, incompetent work and dictatorial action. 
It was introduced last week in the Senate, preceded by time allocation in the other place. 
With passage of this bill, the government will be imposing the largest tax grab in the history of the country. 
Canadians are unaware of what is happening, in particular our young people who will be the most affected and the most mistreated. 
 He supported junior hockey , the Boy Scouts and the Club .
 hockey . Scouts and Optimist Club supported , He Boy the junior
 Boy the and the Scouts He Optimist , Club supported junior .
 , He the Club . Boy Optimist Scouts supported the and hockey
Profoundly proud of his Italian roots, he founded the Federation of Italian Associations in Quebec in 1972, and served honourably as Canada's attaché to the Montreal Olympics in 1976.  
 Olympics ' he founded served of his s , the honourably and as attaché 1976 . Canada the 1972 in of Associations , Montreal Italian to roots in in Italian Profoundly proud Federation Quebec
 attaché , in in s founded he the Italian Quebec the Olympics proud of in honourably served Italian , Federation his Montreal roots to and Associations as . Canada Profoundly 1972 1976 ' of
 attaché roots proud of his to Olympics Montreal honourably Profoundly Quebec s in in , Associations as of 1976 in Italian served the founded the Federation ' and Italian . he , Canada 1972
 as attaché s served the and Canada of his 1976 in of the to founded in Italian , in Montreal Italian proud Associations Federation . roots he Quebec Olympics , 1972 Profoundly ' honourably
 served proud 1972 honourably Quebec the of in Profoundly 1976 roots his Olympics as Italian ' in Canada . founded Montreal Associations Italian Federation attaché of in s , , the and to he
 , honourably he Olympics ' in his . of served Federation and Italian s the , in attaché the to of 1976 Quebec in as Profoundly Montreal founded Associations Italian 1972 proud roots Canada
 ' of attaché he his Italian 1972 roots Profoundly Associations Montreal of honourably , Quebec the and in the in to 1976 founded Italian as proud in . Federation s served , Olympics Canada
 Associations and to served Italian in attaché Montreal proud honourably founded the in ' , s Canada . of 1972 Italian in he Olympics Profoundly Federation , as of his Quebec roots the 1976
 Montreal 1976 the in Italian as proud Olympics and Canada the 1972 founded , in , Quebec his roots . honourably in Federation Associations served ' of Italian Profoundly s of he attaché to
 Olympics roots his he to Associations . founded in proud 1976 1972 Italian , the Quebec of and honourably of attaché as s ' , Federation Profoundly Montreal served Canada in in the Italian
 , Italian he of and ' Quebec 1976 the proud , Associations s Canada in Profoundly in served to as founded in his of attaché the honourably Montreal . 1972 Italian Federation roots Olympics
 the of he Federation served 1976 . honourably and proud Profoundly Associations Olympics his ' in as attaché in Canada the to roots , of Italian in Quebec 1972 s , founded Montreal Italian
 of ' Federation Montreal 1976 proud 1972 Italian in Profoundly the he Associations Canada founded served Olympics as the to , attaché . , honourably of in s his Italian in roots and Quebec
 and of Canada in Olympics 1976 honourably , roots the of Profoundly served Associations the s as in attaché . proud ' he , Italian to Italian founded Federation his Quebec Montreal in 1972
 of , 1976 Profoundly proud Federation Italian Italian as his the , he of Associations honourably in and served s attaché in Quebec . Olympics ' in roots founded the 1972 to Canada Montreal
 , Italian Associations in and to attaché proud Canada Olympics served Profoundly the founded his 1976 in of of ' as honourably , Italian . he Montreal s Federation Quebec roots the 1972 in
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Informetrica Study on Meeting Targets-Government Position 
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Concept of Differing Targets-Government Position 
National Unity 
Recent Remarks of Prime Minister-Possible Conditions of Secession of Quebec-Government Position 
Immigration 
Tracking and Detention of Unsuccessful Refugee Claimants-Government Position 
Detention Facilities for Refugee Claimants-Request for Particulars 
Fisheries and Oceans 
Negotiations on Multilateral Agreement on Investment-Continuation of Limit on Foreign Ownership of Commercial Licences-Government Position 
National Defence 
Search and Rescue Helicopter Replacement Program-Possible Cabinet Discussion on Awarding Contract for Helicopter Purchase-Government Position 
Search and Rescue Helicopter Replacement Program-State of Sea King Helicopter Fleet-Government Position 
Federal-Provincial Relations 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Atlantic Provinces Equal to Increase in Social Transfers-Government Position 
Delayed Answers to Oral Questions 
Human Resources Development 
Changes to Canada Pension Plan-Accountability and Transparency of Investment Board-Undertaking to Publish Quarterly Financial Statements-Government Position 
Changes to Canada Pension Plan-Investment Board Not Subject to Access to Information Act-Government Position 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
Commemoration of Fiftieth Anniversary-Plans of Government 
 Profoundly proud of his Italian roots , he founded the Federation of Italian Associations in Quebec in 1972 , and served honourably as Canada ' s attaché to the Montreal Olympics in 1976
 Olympics . Italian Italian the in roots of as attaché 1976 founded , Canada Profoundly served Quebec , and his to Federation of the he ' honourably s proud in Montreal 1972 in
 the of the and ' in served , as , Italian founded Associations Federation his roots proud . in honourably Quebec in Olympics Canada 1972 he Italian to attaché 1976 of s Montreal
 Montreal proud 1972 Italian served , Quebec in to in the , ' 1976 his of honourably the founded Federation Associations Italian in Olympics s roots attaché . Canada of and he Profoundly
Senator Rizzuto had an unconditional passion for his country. 
 unconditional for his . Rizzuto had Senator an country passion
 unconditional . an for country passion Senator Rizzuto had his
 had passion . unconditional for an Rizzuto country his Senator
 passion Senator for his had an unconditional Rizzuto country .
 had an his passion for country . Senator Rizzuto unconditional
 country an passion Senator his Rizzuto for had . unconditional
 his Rizzuto passion unconditional . Senator an had country for
 . had for Rizzuto an Senator country unconditional passion his
 Senator his had unconditional country Rizzuto . passion an for
 his for . Senator Rizzuto an unconditional passion country had
 for passion an . country unconditional Rizzuto had Senator his
 country . Senator unconditional for passion his an had Rizzuto
 Rizzuto an had Senator country his passion unconditional for .
 an for Rizzuto Senator had country unconditional his . passion
 an unconditional country passion Senator Rizzuto . for had his
 . his an had passion country unconditional for Rizzuto Senator
I want to read those letters into the record because they are important.  
A different situation exists in Quebec. 
Nevertheless, our assembly did not oppose the choice to amend section 93. 
It has always been our conviction that the choice of means is the responsibility of the political authorities.  
They did not oppose.  
The Anglican Archbishop, Archbishop Andrew S. Hutchison, said the following at paragraph 2 of his letter dated November 3: 
The amendments proposed to Article 93 by the Quebec government, which would remove the obligation for the Quebec government to have confessional school boards, seems reasonable to us and in keeping with traditional positions enunciated by the Anglican church.  
Honourable senators, the senior representatives of the mainstream Roman Catholic and Protestant groups did not register their opposition to these changes. 
This does not mean that this exercise was one of perfection. 
Indeed, many of us remain unhappy and regret the federal government's position taken with 23(1)( a ) then and now. 
I share, with Senator Pitfield and others, concern in that respect. 
However, unfortunately, I have a memory, and I recall very well that the 1982 Constitution, for which Senator Pitfield was a senior federal advisor, was a minimalist not a maximalist document. 
It was Senator Pitfield and others in power at the time who determined that, in order to pass the 1982 Constitution, the Province of Quebec should be given the option of proclaiming section 23(1)( a ) and that the notwithstanding clause would be incorporated in the 1982 Constitution to eviscerate the charter, both serious sources of our current distress.  
Many of us objected strenuously then, and do now, to giving the Province of Quebec these options. 
However, that is history. 
Many of us objected to the notwithstanding clause pressed by the other provinces, particularly Manitoba. 
Senator Pitfield was there. 
He understood that. 
This I remember.  
However flawed the 1982 Constitution was with regard to these two aspects, the special joint committee shared a defining moment. 
 Senator Rizzuto had an unconditional passion for his .
 for passion . unconditional an Senator had his country
 . Senator passion an for country unconditional had Rizzuto
 for an had unconditional his Senator . passion country
After one of his visits to England, Sir Wilfrid Laurier once remarked on the harmonious beauty of a Gothic cathedral that he had visited. 
 the . had remarked After beauty once on he England his to visited Sir one Laurier harmonious Wilfrid Gothic of , a cathedral that of visits
 on After visits that he once cathedral England had remarked harmonious to of of Wilfrid Gothic one his the beauty Sir a visited . Laurier ,
 remarked beauty his he on visits harmonious once of , Wilfrid to the one a England visited of After cathedral . Sir Laurier had Gothic that
 After harmonious a had his visited to , beauty cathedral he the Laurier Wilfrid Gothic England that Sir of . of once on one visits remarked
 visited to that one After had Laurier Sir visits England , once his Wilfrid the remarked cathedral Gothic of a harmonious on he of beauty .
 on After England a his had cathedral he . to that visits , the Laurier remarked once Wilfrid visited Sir Gothic of of beauty harmonious one
 he once visited had beauty Laurier visits , cathedral of one remarked harmonious Sir Gothic a England After Wilfrid . on the of to that his
 beauty Laurier that he After of Wilfrid of Sir visits , one on cathedral . Gothic remarked the to visited his harmonious had a once England
 remarked , harmonious of to beauty his a visits cathedral After one that visited Sir England he Wilfrid Laurier . once of had the Gothic on
 to , once . that Sir one visited Wilfrid visits of beauty of on the Laurier he his harmonious a England Gothic cathedral After had remarked
 of England Laurier Gothic of on he one to remarked , beauty visits the . that visited harmonious had After once Wilfrid his cathedral Sir a
 on Laurier . cathedral beauty Gothic After visits Sir a one remarked to Wilfrid had of visited the , once England harmonious of his that he
 one once Gothic of England of Sir beauty visits remarked he After cathedral that on Wilfrid had , to visited a his the Laurier harmonious .
 the remarked . , on his cathedral Laurier Wilfrid visited that After to he visits had a of once Gothic of Sir beauty harmonious one England
 beauty to , had one his Laurier the of on that Sir After . remarked cathedral Wilfrid harmonious visited England a Gothic visits once he of
 he of of harmonious visited the had once one After a . that his Wilfrid to beauty England , Laurier cathedral Gothic remarked visits on Sir
Paul Martin is a real smart guy. 
We remember that he had to stoop to bribing three Atlantic provinces, with other people's money, to fulfil his promises of harmonization. 
He later apologized to the Canadian people for misinforming them.  
Meanwhile, the Prime Minister and Deputy Prime Minister, Sheila Copps, were promising to get rid of the GST, but they did not really mean it, they said, although they were caught out on tape not telling the truth.  
Paul Martin promised in the old Red Book that the government would cancel the helicopter purchase and use the money to pay for more social programs. 
Now, $900 million later, we have no helicopters that fly safely. 
He penned the Red Book to renegotiate the free trade agreement. 
He took all the kudos after the 1993 election.  
Now he says: "Rush Bill C-2. 
Trust me." 
The minister says that he needs the bill now to satisfy an agreement with the provinces. 
I have heard of no agreement. 
No one here has heard of an agreement. 
If someone on the other side knows of an agreement, please tell me.  
We have not heard one province asking us to abandon our parliamentary responsibilities and rush this bill through by January 1 on the threat that they will cancel their agreement. 
The Minister of Finance is rushing so that he can get another $400 million in taxes for the 1997 tax year. 
The brunt of this bill is being borne by middle- and lower-income workers.  
Merry Christmas Canada. 
Let us give Canadians a Christmas present by defeating this bill. 
Let us kill the bill.  
 After one of his visits to England , Sir Wilfrid Laurier once remarked on the harmonious beauty of a Gothic cathedral that he had visited
 visited Wilfrid that once After cathedral Sir visits of he the one remarked beauty to a England harmonious . Laurier on Gothic his of had
 . his beauty harmonious England Sir After he of had Wilfrid once a of , Laurier on remarked cathedral that Gothic one visited to the
 he harmonious England Sir once After remarked on to Laurier Gothic visits beauty cathedral . that his , a had visited of Wilfrid of the
He spoke of the wonderful unity of the cathedral, a unity unerringly moulded from the diversity of granite, oak and the marble used in its construction. 
 the a unerringly used granite in its of , He marble of , spoke cathedral unity diversity and unity the from the . the moulded wonderful oak of construction
 unerringly He . from , of the granite and of unity the moulded a used its construction wonderful , the the in spoke unity cathedral oak of marble diversity
 unity and of wonderful , He oak its , of diversity . granite used from of the unerringly construction cathedral the the the unity spoke moulded marble in a
 its unity , the unity the of in wonderful of and unerringly the used the diversity a of , from He marble construction cathedral granite moulded spoke oak .
 a He the unerringly diversity granite wonderful marble its , moulded the of in cathedral the of oak spoke unity . from unity construction the and , used of
 unity of unity the the spoke construction used cathedral unerringly a moulded He in from and the wonderful of . , the granite its oak marble of diversity ,
 unity unity used spoke of the from construction . a diversity oak of moulded the granite cathedral and wonderful in unerringly He of the its marble , , the
 He marble its of wonderful granite the unity of spoke the moulded in construction of , unity . unerringly a the and the , diversity cathedral from oak used
 in unity construction used the , of from diversity and spoke unity the . cathedral , unerringly the its a oak the of granite moulded wonderful of He marble
 unity the unerringly cathedral moulded unity from of of , of , its the a granite used diversity in construction oak the wonderful . and the He marble spoke
 the cathedral of spoke its . the the He the of moulded unity , unity of used marble unerringly in wonderful from diversity and granite a oak construction ,
 of diversity moulded unity and of oak the construction granite the , spoke from wonderful marble . of a unity the used the , unerringly cathedral He in its
 and unerringly marble wonderful of the spoke from diversity moulded unity in the He of unity the of the construction a , used oak its . cathedral , granite
 moulded spoke , , in the a of . construction used its He of unerringly diversity the oak wonderful marble unity the granite and of cathedral from unity the
 the the in granite oak of its . marble diversity , , wonderful used the cathedral spoke construction from unity and the unity unerringly a moulded He of of
 granite wonderful . moulded the of of the unerringly oak the in unity of the , used diversity unity marble cathedral a spoke and construction , from He its
This is a payroll tax to pay Old Age Pensions, disability, life insurance, benefits to survivors, orphans, children, or exemptions for child rearing. 
We did not have that either, and there is nothing wrong with that. 
They decided that seven years of child rearing would make you part of the CPP labour force, and therefore you can get benefits. 
That is a social program; a good social program, but it is coming out of the pension fund.  
We have spent all this cash over the last 30 years and we say now, "Oh, it is not our fault. 
It is not legislators' fault. 
Senator Gigantès :
Are you quoting the Reform Party?  
Senator Tkachuk :
I do not think so, although I have a few things to say about Reform here too, which I will get to right away.  
I would like to quote Preston Manning's comments from Tuesday, October 28, in committee. 
These are the other guys in the other place. 
He was speaking of Martin and Pettigrew.  
The alternative we would like the committee to consider rests on four pillars rather than three: the seniors benefit, which is targeted to lower-income people; a smaller, more focused CPP, not a scrapped CPP; 
There is the big change from the last election.  
...an expanded RRSP program; and tax relief to seniors. 
We will argue that our four-pillar plan delivers more retirement income per dollar invested than this three-pillar plan the government is putting forward.  
I think I have explained some of the ideas we got from the government side. 
The liability of $600 billion becomes unfunded if we all quit paying CPP premiums, but the obligations still have to be met. 
That is what Reform was proposing through the election campaign and over the previous four years. 
 He spoke of the wonderful unity of the cathedral , a unity unerringly moulded from the diversity of granite , and the marble used in its construction .
 of construction unerringly and in wonderful marble diversity the the of He moulded its unity used of from , granite unity . a the cathedral oak , spoke
 He the construction a oak unity granite used of and cathedral its the the unity marble , in . of moulded the of wonderful diversity spoke from unerringly
 oak moulded He construction the unerringly unity , a granite of marble , the its . spoke and wonderful diversity the unity from in of of the used
He said that it was the perfect illustration of the kind of nation that he wanted Canada to be, a country whose strength was unity through diversity, a harmonious whole in which the granite remains the granite, the oak remains the oak, and the marble remains the marble.  
 that diversity of a and remains marble remains through harmonious unity marble the strength a wanted he the oak the kind of was the in perfect which whole was oak that whose nation . the , granite country illustration to the Canada it He granite , be the remains said , the ,
 nation be kind granite remains the that was the to a remains it that whose , He he and the oak . the the harmonious said unity , strength perfect the country remains , through , of whole granite which oak marble in wanted diversity the the illustration Canada was of a marble
 whose which remains He oak wanted remains a the to illustration was be he unity the of and , remains through whole granite perfect the that harmonious Canada the kind the said marble nation marble that , in oak the diversity country it the of , the was a strength . granite ,
 in . remains the a harmonious perfect illustration granite which of the oak whose that was kind remains and be , it nation , the , was a He through of the the to marble marble the diversity granite that wanted said whole remains country Canada oak the he strength unity the ,
 harmonious granite remains the was perfect the remains oak marble which unity that that wanted of whose the . the oak the kind Canada granite in , the illustration said a it to he whole , through diversity the country a remains He marble the be nation of was , strength and ,
 remains the nation it the . perfect that of a the he illustration He remains was strength , the a was the granite kind and through granite said marble harmonious to whole , whose of Canada country wanted remains the oak diversity that , the marble oak , in unity the be which
 which illustration granite he the a marble that granite the unity in oak was that remains and was a to Canada it , whole , wanted country , harmonious the of He of , be diversity the said nation . whose strength the perfect remains kind the marble the through oak the remains
 the was remains country said . a strength granite nation oak harmonious that the he kind marble of that a to perfect the remains wanted , the whole the marble the remains which unity through of Canada be it He in diversity , granite the , was the and whose oak , illustration
 unity He the country illustration marble a granite . marble was remains to perfect the the wanted oak the the kind said it nation through which the that harmonious , that whole diversity granite strength was , oak and Canada , the whose , of a he of remains be remains the in
 a a marble remains to oak be whose . diversity , the granite He country was , the the remains the through and he was kind , wanted unity strength remains that granite of which illustration it the in said of the perfect marble , nation the harmonious the that whole oak Canada
 granite harmonious whose remains of marble the in marble remains and perfect the wanted nation was through said unity strength the kind oak country the remains he . that which that the granite Canada whole the oak diversity , to illustration was He the of it a , a the , , be
 country Canada the unity nation , the a the he remains wanted whose said it marble oak through harmonious of illustration the be to a kind was which that in of , oak , was strength and He whole , the the . diversity marble the granite perfect remains granite that remains the
 oak a remains of the the was the that through oak marble strength perfect was the nation and said the it a , marble He in harmonious wanted . , Canada to , kind he unity the which remains be of the remains whole diversity , whose granite country granite illustration the that
 which a of perfect the remains marble diversity it was of the , remains the through the whole to wanted unity that granite the he illustration oak the the . remains oak was , He , said nation granite whose a the kind and country Canada , strength marble harmonious in that be
 said to granite the whole remains of perfect kind unity strength , he oak the the the in , He . which the that nation it country the diversity a remains whose marble was , Canada be granite of a marble remains the wanted illustration oak harmonious was that , through and the
 it of nation whole the Canada marble wanted diversity the was that the , harmonious granite strength that the a He whose to a said he in , remains country . remains the , granite through , the perfect was of illustration oak be remains the and kind the oak marble unity which
The government would have us believe that this amount represents an increase in health care payments. 
However, the figures indicate otherwise.  
The following year, in 1999-2000, they will only be $3.748 billion. 
Yet, the government claimed yesterday that it was implementing a stable transfer system. 
In fact, cash payments paid to Quebec for health and education will be reduced by over $300 million over a five-year period. 
Honourable senators, I remind you that these cuts are in addition to this year's reduction of $700 million compared to last year. 
Could the minister make inquiries and inform the Senate of the reasons why, in spite of a cash floor set at $12.5 billion, Quebec's share will diminish by $307 million over the next five years?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
The federal government cut its own spending earlier, more drastically and in greater measure than transfers to the provinces. 
The government has made it clear that it will use increased fiscal flexibility to make strategic investments in priority areas, and action was taken early and directly on that commitment based on favourable fiscal results that emerged this past spring.  
With respect to individual provinces, I do not have those numbers. 
However, I would be happy to provide them for my honourable friend.  
Senator Roberge :
Could the minister find out at the same time why, in the same time period, Ontario's share of the cash transfers will increase to $173 million?  
Senator Graham :
Yes. 
While I am doing that, I should like to remind the honourable senator that even before the federal government balances the books, it is putting more money into transfers to the provinces. 
In fact, the government is raising the cash floor from $11 billion to $12.5 billion, the single largest reinvestment made by the federal government. 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Provinces-Effect on Atlantic Provinces 
Hon. Mabel M. DeWare :
 He said that it was the perfect illustration of the kind of nation that he wanted to be , a country whose strength was unity through diversity , a harmonious whole in which the granite remains the granite , the oak remains the oak , and the marble remains the marble .
 Canada country marble was said unity the whose it in whole , , granite of the remains harmonious to strength kind perfect remains He marble be was that . , the the a and remains nation the the diversity wanted the the oak a granite through of , that illustration which oak
 marble , that , to perfect marble was a remains granite said remains whole through was diversity the the it granite the harmonious of wanted oak . , strength the kind country of that nation the unity a He remains be he , oak whose the in illustration the the and Canada
 to whose illustration a a he remains of Canada be He kind the granite oak remains the perfect and the was unity which country that remains marble granite said nation the that , whole in , marble oak the the . the through harmonious of wanted diversity the , it was strength
When I heard Pietro's children speak in English, French, Italian and Spanish at their father's funeral, I thought of Laurier's dream. 
 speak children heard ' dream thought , of Laurier ' , father and at in English their funeral I Italian Pietro I When . , ' s s s French Spanish
 ' dream at s in father s I children Italian I heard speak ' Pietro Spanish their thought of and English When , ' s funeral French . , Laurier ,
 funeral , s Laurier . ' Pietro , ' in English father Italian French s Spanish s ' thought heard and of at children their speak dream I When , I
 , at English s of thought their Italian dream I ' Spanish . speak I , ' , When Laurier and Pietro in s heard funeral children French s father '
 ' I thought , I ' French dream in , When Pietro , . heard father at Italian of Spanish funeral s children ' English speak their Laurier s s and
 ' children , English s , father heard Laurier at French , thought dream Spanish . and speak ' s ' funeral Italian of their in I Pietro s When I
 , and ' dream Pietro in thought , Laurier . funeral s children their s French heard at father When English I ' of s Spanish , I speak ' Italian
 . Pietro When I ' French , of Spanish , their funeral ' speak and thought Laurier s , father ' I dream in heard children at s s Italian English
 , Spanish ' their children I at dream ' Pietro thought ' Laurier funeral and s speak French When s s Italian English father of , heard , in . I
 When father English French I of I Italian s Laurier . Spanish speak their ' s , funeral dream s in at ' heard ' Pietro , thought and children ,
 ' , at s Italian dream their , ' French thought children Spanish father Laurier When s funeral and . speak in heard , s I English ' I of Pietro
 English children I thought and ' of father Laurier in ' Italian funeral Pietro heard s French ' s their Spanish I s When , , . speak , dream at
 speak French , s s I their dream s Italian ' . heard ' in at I Pietro funeral and Spanish Laurier , When of English children thought father ' ,
 s , their Spanish and of French heard at ' Pietro Italian s I , , father children in speak English I When . ' ' s dream thought funeral Laurier
 children French s I ' , at s Italian English their thought s , funeral and , of I Spanish heard When father Pietro dream ' ' speak . in Laurier
 , Italian ' French thought in , Spanish Pietro father funeral I When heard . s s Laurier and English dream I ' their s speak children at of ' ,
Senator Tkachuk :
Because the Liberals would not agree. 
I will defend my government, and my honourable friend will defend his.  
I will not delve too far into the OAS because there are other speakers who wish to deal with this issue over the next two weeks. 
Perhaps we, as senators, will be able to discuss this matter well into the new year, which I hope we do.  
Senator Gigantès :
You are reading from the wrong script.  
Senator Taylor :
It is obvious that my honourable friend does not have any notes.  
Senator Tkachuk :
I think I am getting to honourable senators opposite.  
I was told by the Honourable Senator Kirby that members opposite would only have one speaker on this issue. 
I have a feeling that we may hear from a few more senators after I and other senators point out some of the weaknesses in Bill C-2.  
Honourable senators, I would reiterate that this is not a pension program: this is a payroll tax! 
In the past, it harboured cheap loans for provinces, and it will harbour a $100-billion fund that will grow to a $1-trillion fund. 
Honourable senators, we will not need to pay the price. 
We will be long gone before the young people who starting out now, and who expect a pension plan when they grow old, will reap the benefits of what we sow today.  
Honourable senators on this side and honourable senators on the other side, I do not know why you would want to rush this bill. 
What is in it for you? 
What is in it for the Minister of Finance? 
 When I heard Pietro ' s children speak in English , French , Italian and Spanish at their father ' s funeral , I thought Laurier ' s dream .
 funeral dream Spanish thought speak ' . I s Laurier When French , at heard Italian s in children , English father ' Pietro of ' and , s I
 in s children funeral English s ' When and father , I of French . thought I Spanish , ' s their , Pietro Italian dream ' at Laurier heard
 Pietro speak , father , thought ' s s dream their French s I heard Italian ' and ' English at Spanish Laurier children of funeral , . I When
I thought, Here is a living example of the kind of wonderful multiculturalism which has made our flag loved and respected around the planet. 
 a , Here around . and planet flag which multiculturalism respected the of wonderful I made thought our the example is has kind living loved of
 example loved . I flag , the living is made our the of planet and Here wonderful has thought kind a respected around which multiculturalism of
 thought is loved , our wonderful and example has I Here a of multiculturalism the respected living . of flag kind made which around the planet
 wonderful the kind . our has respected living which thought of I example multiculturalism made loved of Here planet a around flag and is , the
 our flag is loved . has a kind around , the and multiculturalism wonderful planet thought of the I living of which Here made example respected
 made kind around flag a example multiculturalism of wonderful thought our the planet which of , has . respected living and Here I the is loved
 , a example of thought the kind multiculturalism respected loved and of the which flag around made . has is our I wonderful Here living planet
 kind the flag multiculturalism planet which has , of example made around living respected our is of the loved thought wonderful Here . a I and
 around example kind planet the wonderful , is and of thought living loved our has flag multiculturalism of . a made respected Here I the which
 planet respected of loved multiculturalism the flag which example living our . is around and thought , wonderful Here I the made kind of a has
 multiculturalism around of I wonderful the , which kind living flag thought made . respected is planet a example has loved the and of Here our
 of and our made the I kind respected wonderful , which Here the of living flag has loved . multiculturalism planet around a example is thought
 which has planet the around Here loved made , . multiculturalism kind living wonderful is of our respected of example I and the thought a flag
 living multiculturalism respected . is around example loved Here made thought a the and planet of which of wonderful kind flag , our I the has
 of flag . the living multiculturalism example respected around has made wonderful the of our , kind I is planet Here loved which thought and a
 around made . the has our the planet respected loved multiculturalism and of a kind I thought wonderful which , Here flag of example living is
On the Order: 
Resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Kirby, seconded by the Honourable Senator Joyal, P.C., for the second reading of Bill C-2, to establish the Canada Pension Plan Investment Board and to amend the Canada Pension Plan and the Old Age Security Act and to make consequential amendments to other Acts.  
Hon. David Tkachuk :
However, there are a number of important issues that we believe are relevant and important not only to this side of the house but to all senators. 
Some senators, including me, are interested in this bill from a personal point of view as well. 
This bill was brought in last week so that we could work on it. 
Now, we must complete that work and pass the bill by Christmas. 
I do not think that we are handmaidens. 
We do not have to take orders. 
We must do what is right.  
This bill has important consequences for many of us, and more particularly, for our children and our grandchildren. 
Those people who are already retired and at the age of 65 will receive all their benefits. 
For those people who are in the middle and who will soon be retiring, it is not a big problem for them. 
They will have some reduced benefits and some increased costs. 
To those people who have been paying all their lives - that is, all the baby boomers who will begin to turn 50 - they will receive benefits and be faced with another 15 years of increased costs.  
I will tell you for whom this is important. 
I have a daughter who is 24 and a son who is 21. 
Many of you have children and grandchildren. 
The government is asking them to pay 9.9 per cent - I am sure it is 9.9 per cent because the minister wanted the number to be under the figure 10. That represents 10 per cent of their income, and it will increase with inflation. 
The $35,000 that they pay on today will inevitably be more tomorrow.  
 I thought , Here is a living example of the kind of wonderful multiculturalism which has made our flag loved and respected around planet .
 flag example . I made respected loved is a which has of planet thought wonderful living the Here , kind the and multiculturalism of our
 has our I loved of the and of the , a kind planet around which . flag respected thought example made living wonderful is multiculturalism
 which . has around the respected kind loved made of Here flag multiculturalism wonderful living our I , a example is planet the thought of
I thought, Here is the realization of the vision, the determination and the energy of a young man from Sicily, a young man who immersed himself completely in the economic, social and political life of his adopted country. 
 in a man of young of , and immersed country the thought who himself young . social man energy the a I , the the economic life the is realization from his of , vision and completely , determination political Sicily Here adopted
 social himself immersed political I in vision , young . , realization country from economic and life of energy his adopted , man , a who the Sicily man of the the is completely a the thought young Here determination the and of
 political Sicily realization a in the , his country of social immersed adopted man young vision I man energy who life thought . determination the is of the himself a economic of and the , young , the from Here , completely and
 man the of immersed I the himself social adopted is of and , of , in life completely young young the thought realization a , who . and the economic vision a political from the , Here energy determination his Sicily country man
 adopted life realization man economic the social Sicily , I is of . the and from , vision immersed who a country Here himself young young of the the political , completely the a man determination of in , energy thought his and
 the the life of man , in Sicily economic of from , determination and the the . Here young a young immersed and , thought a energy who , realization social completely his I of man himself vision is adopted political the country
 political young of vision completely thought man , a the Sicily country the Here life realization the energy in the young his determination is and , , of a the who , I of social man himself immersed from adopted and economic .
 the country is social young , of in from . I immersed who adopted realization himself life , young economic of of a thought man man Sicily the political his energy and the determination vision the and , , completely Here the a
 man vision , , country and the who life economic his of himself political of , is from man a Here young Sicily a , the determination adopted the thought in energy and young I completely social the immersed of . realization the
 , his political man Sicily a completely , . young economic immersed I vision adopted , young of is the of from a and social country who himself realization energy and Here the of the thought determination in the , man life the
 immersed country realization and energy Sicily completely who , of the , young , man , determination the and political of social I vision in a . Here young himself thought a life economic his is the the man the adopted from of
 political , country in a from determination of his realization and Here man who the the thought the social a , the , energy immersed I himself adopted . economic man life of the Sicily , completely is young vision young and of
 , energy and realization a , country adopted from political of young the in I who the is thought the man of himself life immersed social his a vision the and completely young man determination Here Sicily economic , of . , the
 from man of realization himself his , country . Here of the of is energy immersed life the thought young determination young , a the adopted political a economic vision and Sicily and the the social completely man , , in who I
 and of energy . Sicily man is a and who economic in man vision of I , young the immersed the life from , Here adopted the , himself the completely political thought young his the , a country of social realization determination
 a the himself from life realization determination . the , I thought of completely immersed and is a who man the economic young the social in Sicily , political , Here of country the man his adopted energy vision and of young ,
Hon. Donald H. Oliver :
As the honourable leader knows, the Department of Immigration maintains detention facilities across the country. 
Can he tell us how many refugee claimants are presently in detention, the number of centres, and the annual cost to Canadians to maintain these centres?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Fisheries and Oceans 
Negotiations on Multilateral Agreement on Investment-Continuation of Limit on Foreign Ownership of Commercial Licences-Government Position 
Hon. Gérald J. Comeau :
Honourable senators, my question to the Leader of the Government in the Senate is in regard to the Multilateral Agreement on Investment. 
One of the fundamental objectives of the MAI is to treat non-resident investors as if they were domestic investors; what is called the national treatment principle. 
The government assures us that attempts will be made to protect our culture, but the government has also been very vague on the other important sectors of our economy.  
Would the minister, therefore, advise this house whether our negotiators will seek to continue the 49-per-cent foreign ownership limit on commercial fishing licences in Canada?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, I am not sure what is the present position. 
I presume that my honourable friend is correct in his assumption, but I will have the matter clarified.  
Senator Comeau :
I might advise the minister that indeed there is a 49-per-cent limit on foreign ownership of licences. 
Unfortunately, almost nothing has been said by the negotiators as to how they will handle these extremely important issues that impact on all the coastal communities of Canada.  
As a supplementary, would the minister also advise whether the government negotiators have been consulting with the fishing industry on this subject? 
If so, what has been the government's position in relation to the fishing industry?  
Senator Graham :
 I thought , Here is the of the vision , the determination and the energy of a young man from Sicily , a young man who immersed himself completely in the economic , social and political life of his adopted country .
 his the , the social himself country young thought . and Sicily of the the from man completely in the who of young of a economic determination adopted immersed a , , political man vision realization , energy and life Here I
 , , political adopted the the man the Sicily immersed man in energy thought and I of country life determination young economic . of a Here is a , realization from who his and social himself young the completely , vision the
 immersed man determination the who man of the and political economic the , of energy I life thought in of a vision realization the his completely social is Here from himself , . young , a Sicily young country adopted the ,
I thought about a great Canadian who died too young.  
 Canadian thought too died a great about I young who .
 young great died thought Canadian I . who about too a
 . I who about thought young a Canadian too died great
 a I too who young died . about Canadian thought great
 Canadian great too I died about who a . thought young
 too Canadian great a . young I thought who about died
 thought young I great died about a who Canadian . too
 died I thought young a Canadian great . who about too
 I too . died Canadian a great about thought who young
 who Canadian thought about too a . I young died great
 thought died too who I Canadian a young about great .
 great thought I who too a Canadian died young about .
 thought great young died Canadian . about I a too who
 . a young who too about Canadian great I died thought
 a died Canadian thought who young about too great . I
 died too . I Canadian a great young thought about who
The good old days are gone.  
We have another problem. 
People live longer. 
Again, science has interfered with a social plan. 
Retiring at age 65, dropping dead three to six years later, depending on your gender, was good for governments. 
At its inception in 1965 - payments started on January 1, 1967 - in order to be eligible for CPP benefits, you had to be 68, and 68 was about the same year that the average male died. 
It was the perfect pension plan:
Pay all your lives, and then die just as the first cheque is put into the mail. 
If there was a postal strike, the government had the benefit of both worlds - the pensioner was dead and the cheque was in the mail.  
From the beginning, the CPP was simple, but it was misnamed. 
It was misnamed because it is also a life insurance program. 
However, it is a silly program when it is part of a pension plan.  
Instead of cancelling the benefit, there is an argument made as to whether it should be means tested when cancelled or not. 
That is an area where we can save a lot of money because, as people are dying today, cheques are going out in the mail, at $3,500 a shot. 
Yet we do not have enough money to pay proper pensions when people are alive.  
It is also a disability program. 
There is nothing wrong with having a disability program, but it is part of the Canada Pension Plan now. 
It is part of a payroll tax to buy universal disability insurance, and then the social engineers took over.  
I want to give senators an historical perspective. 
There have been many amendments made over the years to the CPP. 
 I thought about a great Canadian who died too .
 who thought Canadian I young about a died great .
 I . Canadian too died about young thought who great
 Canadian died too thought great a I young about .
To his wife Pina, who is with us in the gallery today, his children, Melina, Alfonso, Maria Cristina and the members of his extended family, we extend our expression of the deepest sympathy.  
 with expression Cristina To his , members extend his the children extended is , Maria us Pina family , and who Alfonso . in our we , wife of his today , deepest of gallery , the Melina sympathy the
 and in our members extend Cristina us . the Melina , who the , , To today of sympathy children with , expression his his wife the deepest Maria , extended is Alfonso , gallery Pina of we his family
 Alfonso our , wife Maria expression , To sympathy who , today his deepest members is , in and children his Cristina the of the of gallery family the . , extended us his with extend , Pina we Melina
 family Pina sympathy is and with extended of the , gallery his his children . the our To Melina who Alfonso today expression extend members , the , of , Cristina deepest , his , Maria us in wife we
 in expression gallery is of the of Cristina To Maria with our , Alfonso his the wife and , who the , deepest today , sympathy extend , , children family his Melina we members Pina . his extended us
 the , , , Cristina Pina To his and , family Melina members , the who Maria sympathy our the is extend we deepest his gallery , Alfonso with of . us today children extended in of wife his expression
 extended our family today and . , , his who we deepest To the gallery the Melina his Cristina with expression Maria of , us Pina , Alfonso the of children members in his wife , is extend , sympathy
 sympathy gallery , our in wife of extended the , . the of his and Maria his is Alfonso Cristina family , members To expression us Melina with deepest , , extend Pina children who , his we the today
 deepest wife children who today extend of expression Melina with , extended his , Alfonso is , we the his family Cristina us sympathy Maria the Pina the in our , , members and gallery . To his , of
 deepest sympathy . us and , extend his , today family of Pina To who gallery Cristina is , in , wife with expression children Melina of the his we members Maria the the our Alfonso extended , , his
 wife Maria family with , of who children members expression the , in the Pina sympathy deepest the of Melina To . we , , , , today Cristina and his gallery us extended is Alfonso our his extend his
 deepest gallery , today , , and family children . we the To , his the his who with wife members Cristina the of of in , extended extend his is our Alfonso Pina , us Melina Maria expression sympathy
 members his deepest wife extended . Cristina of , children Pina Alfonso the with the the his Melina , Maria gallery who , us and in we , , is of his sympathy family expression our , extend today To
 Alfonso the we his , us and . children sympathy , Melina Cristina wife , of extend members with , of , his gallery Pina family today To in extended his the deepest the who expression is Maria , our
 Maria expression , sympathy , , To children . family of gallery and Pina members his Melina of today wife his his who the our in , , extended Cristina , us extend the is deepest with the Alfonso we
 of expression extend Pina , , his extended of us members in Maria , his who the Melina is , deepest , sympathy Alfonso To , . wife we Cristina our family with today children his the and the gallery
Senator Nolin :
The Supreme Court received the request from your government to decide on the issue of Quebec's secession. 
We will learn in all likelihood from the Supreme Court that the amending formula would be appropriate if Canadians agreed to allow one province to separate from the others. 
Have the Prime Minister, the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs or officials of your government had formal or informal discussions on this matter with the representatives of the nine other provinces?  
Senator Graham :
Not that I am aware, honourable senators. 
We are aware, of course, of the meetings that took place with the premiers in Calgary. 
We know there is a first ministers' conference later this week in Ottawa, at which this matter may or may not arise. 
However, I am not aware that there have been discussions, either formal or informal, between the Prime Minister and the premiers up to this point in time.  
Immigration 
Tracking and Detention of Unsuccessful Refugee Claimants-Government Position 
Hon. Donald H. Oliver :
Honourable senators, my question to the Leader of the Government in the Senate is a continuation of the line of questions I had for the honourable leader yesterday. 
Will the Leader of the Government tell this chamber what plans are being considered to detain those who are dangerous, or who are judged to be unlikely to depart of their own free will? 
Where will they be detained, and under what controls to ensure that Canadians are protected?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, I take my honourable friend's question seriously, as I did the questions he put yesterday. 
I am still attempting to obtain clarification for him on this matter as soon as possible.  
Detention Facilities for Refugee Claimants-Request for Particulars 
Hon. Donald H. Oliver :
 To his wife Pina , who is with us in the gallery today , his children , Melina , Alfonso Maria Cristina and the members of his extended family , we extend our expression of the deepest sympathy .
 Maria Cristina , , extend the his , gallery . , of is , family who wife expression and deepest today To us the of his with children we Pina his extended Alfonso , members in our Melina sympathy
 his , us , Cristina expression deepest the wife , we , Pina , who Maria extended is family gallery the sympathy his . in Melina members To our his children , of Alfonso extend the and with today
 , Melina Alfonso his we expression and in the us , To our who gallery extend is family , the wife his with extended Cristina members of children , , deepest today of Pina sympathy his , . Maria
Riposa in pace, mio caro amico.  
 . in caro , Riposa amico mio pace
 in mio . amico , Riposa pace caro
 mio caro , amico Riposa . pace in
 pace caro mio . , in Riposa amico
 amico in , caro . mio pace Riposa
 amico pace , mio Riposa caro . in
 caro mio Riposa , in . amico pace
 pace amico in , Riposa . mio caro
 , Riposa in pace . caro amico mio
 Riposa caro mio , pace . amico in
 mio amico , pace caro . Riposa in
 mio . in , amico pace caro Riposa
 amico Riposa caro , in . pace mio
 amico pace Riposa , caro in mio .
 amico caro . pace mio in Riposa ,
 . , caro amico in pace Riposa mio
Senator Thompson's use of the Senate resources ordinarily made available to him for the carrying out of his parliamentary functions, including funds, goods, services and premises, be suspended; 
2. Senator Thompson's allowances for travel and telecommunications expenses be suspended, with the exception of his expenses for travel between his place of residence in Ontario and the Senate in Ottawa; and 
3. Senator Thompson may apply in person to have this decision varied to the Standing Committee on Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration, which the Committee has the authority to do.  
Your Committee, in conjunction with the Standing Committee on Privileges, Standing Rules and Orders, is continuing to study this issue.  
Respectfully submitted, 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this report be taken into consideration?  
On motion of Senator Rompkey, report placed on the Orders of the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate.  
ADJOURNMENT 
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58(1) h ), I move, seconded by the Honourable Senator De Bané: 
That when the Senate adjourns today, it do stand adjourned until tomorrow, Wednesday, December 10, 1997, at 1:30 p.m. 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is leave granted, honourable senators?  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
Motion agreed to.  
International Assembly of French-Speaking Parliamentarians 
Meeting held in Luxembourg-Report of Canadian Section Tabled 
Hon. Pierre De Bané :
 in pace , mio caro amico .
 in Riposa amico pace caro , mio
 in mio Riposa caro pace amico .
 mio , in Riposa amico . caro
Hon. Roch Bolduc :
 : Bolduc Hon Roch .
 : . Bolduc Hon Roch
 Bolduc Roch Hon : .
 Bolduc . : Hon Roch
 . Hon : Roch Bolduc
 Roch . Hon Bolduc :
 Roch . Bolduc : Hon
 Bolduc Roch . Hon :
 . Bolduc : Hon Roch
 Hon . Roch : Bolduc
 Roch Hon . Bolduc :
 . Roch : Hon Bolduc
 Roch : Bolduc . Hon
 Roch Hon : . Bolduc
 . : Roch Bolduc Hon
 Hon Roch Bolduc . :
It became evident to me that a deep and thorough consensus had developed for radical reformation, at least among the elites of Quebec. 
Claude Ryan, an old friend of mine and the then Minister of Education, had galvanized that reform process over a decade ago in Quebec. 
It was equally clear to me that the existing school structures were in desperate need of renovation, particularly in light of the overlapping school structures in Quebec and the financial restraints facing all governments.  
Rather than an historic essay, perhaps it would be simpler if I could share with you my thought processes and the evidence I found as a member of the Standing Senate Committee on the Quebec Resolution Requesting Constitutional Change.  
First, a brief word about committees and their work. 
There are, as all senators know, three committee structures in Parliament: the committees of the other place, our Senate committees - both special and standing - and the special joint and standing committees of the Senate and the House of Commons. 
I prefer Senate committees.  
Senate committees are less partisan, more thorough and more careful. 
Joint committees are a compromise, but I am confident that the Senate's practice of care and attention was, for the most part, adopted in the work of the special joint committee on the Quebec school question.  
It is true, as senators have pointed out, that the special joint committee was given a short time-frame to make its recommendations. 
However, committee members were assiduous in assuring all points of view were heard, unlike the Government of Quebec which chose not to have public hearings. 
This made our task doubly difficult.  
As senators, we are unlike any other evidence-gathering body. 
We gather evidence, we serve as our own advisors, seek our own counsel, we become judges, and we become the jury. 
We are the supreme court of the land when it comes to legislation. 
We must view the evidence before committees with care. 
I urge all senators, before they vote, to carefully review the full transcript of the evidence.  
Let me say at the outset that I was very sceptical, particularly after having read the Quebec resolution which was adopted unanimously in the Quebec Assembly, save for two abstentions, and which was quickly passed by the Quebec assembly requesting the federal government amend section 93 of the Constitution by deleting the subsections in so far as their application pertains to Quebec. 
These sections were incorporated in the British North American Act, 1867. 
The Quebec resolution in its fourth recital gave the Quebec assembly's opinion that the proposed amendment to section 93 requested in no way constituted recognition by the Quebec assembly of the Constitution Act, 1982, which was adopted without its consent.  
 Hon . Roch :
 Bolduc . : Roch
 Bolduc Hon Roch :
 : Hon . Bolduc
Honourable senators, I did not know Senator Rizzuto until I came to the Senate. 
 know I Senate did not . to , came the Senator Honourable Rizzuto senators until I
 did Rizzuto the until not I Senate . know to , came Honourable I Senator senators
 Rizzuto did Honourable not the I senators I . Senate came until , Senator to know
 not I Rizzuto know I Honourable . until senators the Senator to did came , Senate
 came the did I Senator know senators Honourable . to I Senate Rizzuto until not ,
 Senate , know until not . I senators I did Honourable came Rizzuto the Senator to
 the did Senator came Honourable know not I , . Senate until to Rizzuto I senators
 know senators Rizzuto Senate I I Senator not . , to until the did came Honourable
 I did not Honourable to senators . , Rizzuto I until know came Senator the Senate
 to Senator the , . came I until know Senate did not senators Rizzuto Honourable I
 came to Rizzuto Senate until not the know I senators . Senator Honourable , did I
 came until I to the know Senate , Senator senators did Rizzuto I not Honourable .
 Senate . know the , I Senator came until I senators did Honourable not to Rizzuto
 Senator did Rizzuto the senators until . came Senate to Honourable I , I know not
 Senate I not until Honourable , . know did came I senators to the Senator Rizzuto
 Rizzuto did Honourable the until Senator I not know . senators Senate came , I to
Given the consultation process preceding Kyoto, could the Leader of the Government tell us which provinces and territories support the position that the federal government is currently advancing in Kyoto, and could he also tell us which ones do not support this position?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, if I were in Kyoto I would be able to offer Senator Spivak a more definitive answer. 
I know that the Province of Alberta is well represented in Kyoto, as the Honourable Senator Ghitter has alluded to in the past.  
I do not know the positions of the individual provinces. 
Certainly there was an enormous amount of consultation at meetings in various parts of the country prior to the Kyoto conference.  
The meetings of officials have proceeded for several days. 
I understand that meetings of ministers got under way yesterday or the day before and are continuing until tomorrow.  
The Canadian delegation is in the midst of negotiations and is considering the best approach for all of Canada. 
In that context, I am sure all of those present from the provinces are being consulted. 
The negotiations are in a state of flux at the present time and it might be premature for me to speculate on what the outcome might be.  
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Target Year for Implementation of Government Position taken at Kyoto-Government Position 
Hon. Mira Spivak :
I thank the Leader of the Government for his answer. 
I should like to point out that Manitoba is distinct from Alberta, as are all provinces.  
In their December 1 announcement, the government also revealed that not until 1999 would they be able to provide more detail as to the costs and specific actions that would be required to meet our Kyoto commitments. 
Assuming that it will take some time to implement the actions that the government will propose in 1999, it could be the year 2000, 2001, 2002 or 2003 before the government takes steps to meet its Kyoto targets. 
Some of these actions will undoubtedly entail negotiations and agreements with provincial governments, which means it could be as late as 2006 before the government can meet the targets which were set out.  
Perhaps the Leader of the Government in the Senate could tell us in which year implementation of the Kyoto decisions will begin, because, surely, that must have been taken into consideration prior to the Kyoto meeting.  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
 Honourable senators , I not know Senator Rizzuto until I came to the Senate .
 until Honourable , to the Senator senators Senate did I know Rizzuto not I .
 Honourable Senator the . did came Senate I Rizzuto I senators know until , to
 not until I to senators the Rizzuto , did . came I Senator Senate know
I came to know him here, and to appreciate his great qualities. 
 I here qualities to came his him great appreciate . , and know to
 I to great . and , here to appreciate qualities his him know came
 his came to him qualities to , here great . know appreciate I and
 his and know to , him qualities I to here came appreciate great .
 I great his qualities him to here . appreciate came , know and to
 to to . came , his and qualities appreciate I know great here him
 appreciate qualities great . his to to and here know came I him ,
 , know him appreciate to . his here came and to I qualities great
 know appreciate and him . his , to qualities here great I to came
 his know here appreciate and , qualities I to came to great him .
 to I great and here him to appreciate know came his , qualities .
 to came . , his and appreciate him here know great I qualities to
 qualities to I know and , came great . to here appreciate him his
 know his to great came I , to him and here appreciate . qualities
 qualities came know . to and I appreciate , to great him his here
 here and qualities him . I his came know to , great to appreciate
Senator Graham :
Not that I am aware, honourable senators. 
We are aware, of course, of the meetings that took place with the premiers in Calgary. 
We know there is a first ministers' conference later this week in Ottawa, at which this matter may or may not arise. 
However, I am not aware that there have been discussions, either formal or informal, between the Prime Minister and the premiers up to this point in time.  
Immigration 
Tracking and Detention of Unsuccessful Refugee Claimants-Government Position 
Hon. Donald H. Oliver :
Honourable senators, my question to the Leader of the Government in the Senate is a continuation of the line of questions I had for the honourable leader yesterday. 
Will the Leader of the Government tell this chamber what plans are being considered to detain those who are dangerous, or who are judged to be unlikely to depart of their own free will? 
Where will they be detained, and under what controls to ensure that Canadians are protected?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, I take my honourable friend's question seriously, as I did the questions he put yesterday. 
I am still attempting to obtain clarification for him on this matter as soon as possible.  
Detention Facilities for Refugee Claimants-Request for Particulars 
Hon. Donald H. Oliver :
As the honourable leader knows, the Department of Immigration maintains detention facilities across the country. 
Can he tell us how many refugee claimants are presently in detention, the number of centres, and the annual cost to Canadians to maintain these centres?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Fisheries and Oceans 
 I came to know him , and to appreciate his great qualities .
 came qualities appreciate him I to know his to here and great ,
 to came here to great I qualities his . him , know appreciate
 , came appreciate know to . I here qualities him his and to
Some of his good friends were on this side, for instance Senators Charbonneau and Beaulieu.  
 of Some good for and instance . Beaulieu Senators this were friends on , his side Charbonneau
 , of good his . Charbonneau on side Some and instance for friends this Beaulieu Senators were
 good Beaulieu . his , instance Some Charbonneau on and were of side friends this for Senators
 , Some for of Charbonneau Beaulieu friends this Senators and good on instance side . were his
 Some . side friends Beaulieu and good of for Charbonneau instance on this , Senators were his
 and . were instance good Senators for of , side Charbonneau on friends this Beaulieu Some his
 instance . good were and , side his Beaulieu friends for Senators of this on Charbonneau Some
 and friends of his Beaulieu were this on instance . good Charbonneau side Some Senators for ,
 for Charbonneau friends side were of Senators good Some and , Beaulieu . this instance on his
 his were of and good Beaulieu for side instance Senators on this Charbonneau , Some friends .
 Beaulieu for friends side his were this Some of good Senators instance on , . Charbonneau and
 were Some friends Senators Charbonneau side . his , good Beaulieu on for this of and instance
 instance Beaulieu were , of his good friends this and on Senators . side for Some Charbonneau
 good friends Beaulieu and his were , instance this for side Charbonneau on . of Senators Some
 Beaulieu instance good side Senators and were on . , for Some of Charbonneau friends this his
 good his , Beaulieu of Senators this were for friends . Charbonneau on side Some and instance
Present State and Future of Forestry 
Report of Agriculture and Forestry Committee Tabled 
Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration 
Seventh Report of Committee Presented 
ADJOURNMENT 
International Assembly of French-Speaking Parliamentarians 
Meeting held in Luxembourg-Report of Canadian Section Tabled 
Foreign Affairs 
Committee Authorized to Meet During Sitting of the Senate 
The Senate 
Conduct of Business-Notice of Inquiry 
QUESTION PERIOD 
Federal-Provincial Relations 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Province of Quebec-Request for Particulars 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Provinces-Effect on Atlantic Provinces 
Environment 
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Support by Provinces of Government Position taken at Kyoto-Request for Particulars 
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Target Year for Implementation of Government Position taken at Kyoto-Government Position 
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Informetrica Study on Meeting Targets-Government Position 
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Concept of Differing Targets-Government Position 
 Some of his good friends were on this side , for instance Charbonneau and Beaulieu .
 of Some his , for . instance good were friends Charbonneau on Beaulieu this Senators side
 his of friends Charbonneau for . this on instance , good side and were Senators Some
 , and Senators on this . good Beaulieu of Some for Charbonneau side instance friends his
The latter senator introduced him to me with glowing praise, even though they were competitors in private life. 
 to introduced competitors with latter they , were me praise in senator even glowing though life . The him private
 private competitors him The though glowing to introduced were me praise . latter , even in senator life they with
 were even private glowing praise The . in life with they him though introduced , senator to latter me competitors
 in him The even glowing with , praise though senator latter competitors . introduced me were life private to they
 him in latter introduced . were life private me they though to The with even praise , senator glowing competitors
 me introduced private though to praise competitors they latter , life . were glowing him senator with The even in
 life even were glowing senator me him private praise to with latter though in competitors The introduced they . ,
 were . me senator him competitors latter in , The life they praise glowing with to though private even introduced
 , latter private him to senator The even with competitors were me in praise life introduced . glowing though they
 to competitors even introduced senator him life though . The me they , in latter with private glowing praise were
 with life me . though in senator The latter private introduced glowing they , even praise to were him competitors
 glowing were . even they him , praise though in private life me with senator to competitors introduced The latter
 competitors him The life with praise in me , were though latter to glowing senator private they . introduced even
 him me life were though latter even to in The , glowing . introduced competitors they private with senator praise
 him though me introduced glowing private were competitors senator , even in life praise to they . with latter The
 senator praise me though they glowing . competitors , him introduced in The latter were with even private life to
They could be considered privileges for geographically defined and certain narrowly cast denominational groups.  
Notwithstanding this difficulty, I still considered we had a responsibility to examine whether these groups, said to be affected by these privileges or narrow rights or attenuated rights, agreed with their substitution - not their diminishment or removal - for the architecture of denominational access now afforded under the provisions of Quebec educational laws. 
I say "substitution" because, while the constitutional provisions were being attenuated, denominational rights had previously been incorporated in the Quebec Education Bill 109 and its predecessors leading to that bill. 
There is a clear, overwhelming consensus for citizens in the province of Quebec to maintain a form, some form, of denominational teaching within their school system architecture.  
It is equally clear that there was an overwhelming consensus with few dissents throughout every segment of Quebec for renovating the Quebec school system into two linguistic streams, two linguistic boards, English and French. 
There is no question whatsoever in my mind, based on the evidence that I heard.  
Now we come to the more difficult question confronting members of the committee - to determine if there was a "majority" of the so-called "minorities" affected or given these denominational privileges.  
Even here, we had difficulty in definition. 
Notwithstanding that, we still treated that majority as if it were a minority.  
I will not repeat Senator Stewart's questions yesterday about section 93 and its limited scope, but I commend all students of the Constitution to examine section 93 and see how even the subsections of section 93, in so far as that section pertains to the province of Quebec, are much narrower in its scope than is clearly understood or debated in this Senate chamber. 
I will not go into that aspect of this debate. 
It would take half an hour, but I would be pleased to do so privately with any senator who is interested.  
The evidence we heard was extensive, definitive and clear. 
Let me quickly review the committee's evidence that brought it to conclude that there was a strong majority of the so-called minorities affected.  
We had a unanimous resolution in the National Assembly of Quebec, both parties, with two abstentions. 
The efforts made by the Quebec ministers seem to assure that a strong consensus had been obtained.  
We heard direct evidence from 68 groups composed of over 100 individual witnesses. 
Notwithstanding the short time-frames allotted in our terms of reference and as referenced by Senator Lynch-Staunton, the committee clearly heard every viewpoint that people wished to express.  
I hear Senator Wood. 
I will deal with her concerns in a moment.  
 The latter senator introduced him to me with glowing , even though they were competitors in private life .
 in him were though The life me competitors to praise they latter even , introduced private . glowing senator
 to glowing . The competitors even they introduced life praise latter , me private were with him senator in
 latter praise him . though in with private introduced The competitors me glowing to were senator even they life
Senator Riel also knew him well, and shared that opinion.  
 . shared Senator him knew , opinion and Riel that well also
 knew , also Senator him Riel shared opinion that . well and
 that him knew and Riel Senator . , shared also well opinion
 that knew and him well Senator opinion , . shared Riel also
 opinion Senator and . shared well Riel that , him knew also
 shared . Senator also Riel , and knew that well opinion him
 and that opinion also , Senator shared well him knew Riel .
 well that , opinion him . Riel knew shared Senator also and
 , knew and Senator . him that Riel also shared opinion well
 well . opinion knew Senator and him , that also shared Riel
 and . him also , opinion Senator Riel shared that well knew
 and knew opinion Riel that Senator also shared , well him .
 and opinion , well shared knew him Riel Senator that . also
 him also shared and Riel . knew opinion that , well Senator
 also that , Riel Senator . well opinion and knew shared him
 . shared Riel him and knew that well also opinion , Senator
Honourable senators, I have a number of concerns regarding the statements of Senator Stratton. 
I would like to know what his position is on the working poor and on part-time workers. 
In this country, there are more part-time workers and more working poor than there are people who identify as middle class. 
What is the honourable senator's opinion on that?  
In this country, we have a totally isolated segment of society which is called "the mid-Canada corridor." 
Even in terms of communications, there is very little. 
What would the honourable senator do in the area of communication for those in isolated settlements regarding private pension plans? 
There are no words in Cree or michif for "private pension plan."  
I was a member of the working poor in 1965 and 1966 when this plan was put into force. 
I did not agree with the Canada Pension Plan. 
However, I will guarantee honourable senators right now that I totally agree with deductions being made, because now at least I have a pension.  
What will happen if this plan goes through is that the people in this country who really need it will get it. 
They have to travel 240 kilometres to the closest bank. 
Many do not speak English. 
What would you do in this case for these people who have nothing?  
Some Hon. Senators :
Hear, hear!  
Senator Stratton :
I thank the honourable senator for her question. 
It was an excellent question, and it is one that she should ask of the government. 
 Senator Riel also knew him well , and shared that .
 that Riel him , opinion and Senator also well shared knew
 . that him and shared , knew also Riel well Senator
 and . that Senator Riel shared knew well him also opinion
During the hectic times surrounding the GST debate, I found what was going on here in this august setting rather scandalous. 
 surrounding found on GST going what times setting . august hectic the debate the was During here in scandalous this rather I ,
 on was this . rather scandalous in surrounding debate , the what times setting going hectic GST here I During the august found
 what going surrounding times this , august here debate scandalous was on I in the setting rather found hectic the During GST .
 was the . found During , GST surrounding hectic going times I scandalous what the here setting august on in this debate rather
 was setting I hectic scandalous debate the rather in here . going During , on this GST the times august surrounding found what
 found rather scandalous surrounding this setting GST on the hectic what I debate times During here august was the in going . ,
 found in the the what , hectic surrounding on this I times debate . During setting was GST going here august rather scandalous
 scandalous on what During rather hectic surrounding GST in found the times this was I setting here . debate going , the august
 what debate rather found , this in here times the surrounding august I setting going . on the GST was During scandalous hectic
 found setting what During times going the GST was august , I scandalous debate here in surrounding rather the . this hectic on
 this august what hectic on here I the . rather was setting times in scandalous found , going GST debate surrounding the During
 found here . hectic setting GST august scandalous the surrounding rather , in I going was During the times debate on what this
 on the found in what , During GST I hectic going scandalous setting . surrounding the was rather this august times debate here
 , in what GST here was going found the I hectic this on august debate rather scandalous During times setting surrounding . the
 times scandalous in going here on the was this I hectic what the august GST found . During setting surrounding rather , debate
 times surrounding During GST the in what found setting . I rather on scandalous was this debate going hectic here , august the
Detention Facilities for Refugee Claimants-Request for Particulars 
Hon. Donald H. Oliver :
As the honourable leader knows, the Department of Immigration maintains detention facilities across the country. 
Can he tell us how many refugee claimants are presently in detention, the number of centres, and the annual cost to Canadians to maintain these centres?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Fisheries and Oceans 
Negotiations on Multilateral Agreement on Investment-Continuation of Limit on Foreign Ownership of Commercial Licences-Government Position 
Hon. Gérald J. Comeau :
Honourable senators, my question to the Leader of the Government in the Senate is in regard to the Multilateral Agreement on Investment. 
One of the fundamental objectives of the MAI is to treat non-resident investors as if they were domestic investors; what is called the national treatment principle. 
The government assures us that attempts will be made to protect our culture, but the government has also been very vague on the other important sectors of our economy.  
Would the minister, therefore, advise this house whether our negotiators will seek to continue the 49-per-cent foreign ownership limit on commercial fishing licences in Canada?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, I am not sure what is the present position. 
I presume that my honourable friend is correct in his assumption, but I will have the matter clarified.  
Senator Comeau :
I might advise the minister that indeed there is a 49-per-cent limit on foreign ownership of licences. 
Unfortunately, almost nothing has been said by the negotiators as to how they will handle these extremely important issues that impact on all the coastal communities of Canada.  
As a supplementary, would the minister also advise whether the government negotiators have been consulting with the fishing industry on this subject? 
If so, what has been the government's position in relation to the fishing industry?  
 During the hectic times surrounding the GST debate , I found what was going on here in this august setting rather scandalous
 what found the , scandalous times on rather During was going setting here . surrounding august I the hectic this in GST
 here GST was scandalous august times , surrounding I debate in the . on During this the rather found hectic setting going
 hectic august I debate on times . rather here in the During setting was surrounding , found the scandalous this going GST
I saw how impressively calm Senator Rizzuto remained. 
 . impressively Rizzuto I saw Senator how remained calm
 Senator remained calm how . I impressively Rizzuto saw
 . Rizzuto Senator remained I how impressively saw calm
 I remained Rizzuto calm impressively saw Senator . how
 Rizzuto I calm saw impressively remained . how Senator
 . I calm how Senator remained impressively saw Rizzuto
 calm I Senator saw Rizzuto remained how impressively .
 . remained Senator Rizzuto calm I impressively saw how
 Rizzuto saw impressively how remained . I Senator calm
 I impressively . calm how Rizzuto remained saw Senator
 I Senator impressively saw . remained how calm Rizzuto
 impressively calm I how Rizzuto remained . saw Senator
 how remained . Senator impressively I calm saw Rizzuto
 impressively Rizzuto how remained I . Senator calm saw
 calm impressively saw Rizzuto how remained . Senator I
 Senator . remained Rizzuto calm how saw impressively I
Energy-Department of Justice-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Energy-Department of Multiculturalism-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Energy-Department of Natural Resources-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Defence-Status of Clothe the Soldier Project 
Defence-Status of the Armoured Personnel Carrier Replacement Program 
Business of the Senate 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
Second Reading-Debate Continued 
Canada Cooperatives Bill 
First Reading 
Criminal Code 
Interpretation Act 
Bill to Amend-Second Reading-Motions in Amendment-Debate Adjourned to Await Ruling of Speaker 
Motion in Sub-Amendment 
Quebec 
Linguistic School Boards-Amendment to Section 93 of Constitution-Report of Special Joint Committee Adopted 
Quebec 
Linguistic School Boards-Motion to Amend Section 93 of Constitution-Debate Adjourned 
Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration 
Sixth Report of Committee Adopted 
 I saw how impressively Senator Rizzuto remained .
 Rizzuto impressively . how Senator calm remained saw
 remained I . calm Rizzuto Senator impressively how
 how impressively . calm I Rizzuto Senator saw
It was obvious that he did not approve of the way our sittings were going either, and we exchanged our impressions outside the chamber as we walked back to our offices, which were near each other.  
 , he we to impressions the exchanged each sittings of other obvious we approve and was not near offices It did walked way were . either as were our our which back that the our going chamber , outside
 were obvious we which back each as to near not either exchanged that we walked and sittings , It our did he the were impressions was outside going approve chamber the . our , our other of way offices
 It , going did to obvious as sittings our . impressions the that exchanged our each , the offices way near other he our was were we were not chamber back outside walked and which we approve either of
 near the approve outside , other he way our not . which going each , exchanged did was sittings we our impressions chamber It walked our that back either of the to we as and obvious were were offices
 which was of . exchanged as not our we , chamber each back he our approve offices that going other impressions way the obvious , our sittings to we near did the were walked It were outside either and
 were we obvious other approve way each were was not and near offices he we , . did chamber the of our It the outside sittings our exchanged to impressions which that , our either as back walked going
 , not chamber our we were was walked the impressions It obvious near as . to exchanged our which , were we did our going sittings offices that outside the other of approve and way each back either he
 going walked . was other outside our we as the near , were chamber and to way each of exchanged obvious either approve he our back not which did were the sittings , our we offices that It impressions
 were approve offices of and which our It he was each exchanged chamber other . obvious , walked back outside to way not we near sittings we our that , as going the were impressions our either did the
 offices , our , of approve and exchanged we were to the walked we . either as which back that obvious sittings were It going each other he chamber did the near was not our our outside impressions way
 back he of obvious offices way other each as we approve our we were . our did were which was sittings and either walked the our impressions chamber not exchanged that to outside the , near It going ,
 the It we as impressions our . which of the not going we were back obvious sittings chamber , near way outside that did were offices exchanged approve was our to each walked other , he and our either
 sittings the . our exchanged impressions near way were and outside we offices were which obvious each It approve our back we was of chamber , other that did he our as going either walked the to , not
 not way going and of was the sittings . our were each did offices chamber back to other we outside which walked impressions our obvious we as It that , either near , approve the our he were exchanged
 sittings each the we of way exchanged near either were were he offices not impressions our approve . was walked It chamber our did as and our going , obvious to that back , which outside we other the
 and , sittings walked way near outside not that each our obvious was our the we back either of to approve were going offices did he our other were It as . chamber which impressions exchanged the , we
In response to the federal government's Program Review, the Canadian Forest Service (CFS) underwent strategic restructuring to rationalize its operations and to reduce infrastructure costs in the interest of providing maximum funding to research within the context of a reduced operating budget. 
As a consequence, Petawawa National Forest Institute (PNFI) was identified as one of the several Natural Resources Canada (NRCan) operations to be closed as part of a redefined departmental initiative to refocus our Science and Technology (S&T) programs. 
These programs address issues of national and international significance and service our clients through stronger, more effective partnerships with the provinces, industry and other players in the forest sector. 
All the major programs from PNFI have been transferred to the five current CFS research Centres and accordingly the majority of basic research activities from PNFI are ongoing. 
Claims of expenditure for upgrades prior to decommissioning were in fact for operational maintenance, purchase of equipment and some site enhancements. 
With the closure of the site all research equipment and transportable assets relevant to ongoing program activities have been moved to other CFS research Centres with their respective researcher's programs.  
The final phase of deconstruction has been delayed twice in order to seek alternate tenants for the townsite. 
The site in its current state represents a safety risk both in terms of security and liability and requires significant annual expenditures for heating and infrastructure to simply be maintained.  
Answers to Order Paper Questions Tabled 
Energy-Department of the Environment-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) table the answer to Question No. 13 on the Order Paper-by Senator Kenny.  
Energy-Department of Justice-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) table the answer to Question No. 26 on the Order Paper-by Senator Kenny.  
Energy-Department of Multiculturalism-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) table the answer to Question No. 31 on the Order Paper-by Senator Kenny.  
Energy-Department of Natural Resources-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) table the answer to Question No. 34 on the Order Paper-by Senator Kenny.  
Defence-Status of Clothe the Soldier Project 
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) table the answer to Question No. 60 on the Order Paper-by Senator Forrestall.  
Defence-Status of the Armoured Personnel Carrier Replacement Program 
 It was obvious that he did not approve of the way our sittings were going either , and we exchanged our impressions outside the as we walked back to our offices , which were near each other .
 It either not as and other obvious were our we did back our to which exchanged chamber way walked offices he our , the of near that the approve . was , going we impressions outside were each
 way the exchanged each chamber impressions which obvious our that , were were and , It outside our either offices he sittings was the going not near other to as we of did approve walked our . we
 near the as and did we were other we to our our approve , were walked , exchanged was chamber It obvious going outside either he way sittings back offices impressions . not each which the our of
He was a man of sound judgment, full of practical common sense, wisdom and moderation, greatly devoted to the public good, and appreciative of how lucky we were to live in this wonderful country.  
 sense greatly a , we lucky of , live this moderation full were in He appreciative how judgment was to devoted country , sound . public wisdom the man and practical wonderful and good of of , common to
 common of wisdom greatly devoted country public judgment in full lucky were practical of , and moderation and how the . He was wonderful good this sound to live we appreciative of to man , , , a sense
 to common this greatly lucky . in sound wonderful to the , and , public a man full we country , and of good of , were moderation live devoted practical how He was sense appreciative judgment of wisdom
 , and practical moderation to full we , man how was live appreciative good this sound common wisdom were . of , in wonderful He to of devoted lucky country public greatly a the and , sense of judgment
 of and , moderation public practical we sound man wisdom of and , judgment appreciative lucky a was live He in common wonderful sense to this , devoted greatly good country , how to . of were full the
 , greatly the and of a in . wisdom was sound He appreciative country full we man good , were lucky moderation of public common devoted judgment , of to , how this and live sense wonderful to practical
 common in greatly devoted to , were live man of to of judgment . how full He practical sound was appreciative , , we the country public wonderful sense and moderation of wisdom and good lucky this , a
 . , , we , and of common greatly of devoted a sound of how country appreciative moderation lucky , the to public practical this live good and judgment wisdom full was were to He in sense wonderful man
 the appreciative sound to wisdom we , , man practical live sense were good , . of to in He and country wonderful how public devoted common moderation , was greatly a and of this judgment full lucky of
 He , was of and of sense practical live , to lucky . the public , common full country of moderation sound appreciative greatly in wonderful devoted this how we wisdom to and a good man judgment were ,
 judgment and of good wisdom country sound of . moderation to lucky , common live a devoted wonderful sense of appreciative He , , were we to man public the how and , was this in practical full greatly
 of in wonderful devoted live was of the practical . He public to a full , of wisdom appreciative , country how we to lucky sound and and moderation this , good greatly , common sense were judgment man
 , of was good , devoted how a He judgment and of we moderation lucky in wonderful sound practical were greatly man public wisdom this full , to appreciative the . country sense and common live of , to
 country common , appreciative were the . of how devoted was a lucky in this moderation we to to sound , good sense judgment wisdom He of greatly , full and live of wonderful practical , and man public
 , , and a judgment and we wisdom the live appreciative sense of this was how greatly of full country were of man , in . common good to sound moderation devoted public to , wonderful He practical lucky
 how we this of man was sound wonderful to good were in country practical , of appreciative , . , and He live lucky moderation public judgment common greatly devoted full wisdom a to sense of , and the
As a result, Wednesday has become a normal working session, going on until five or six o'clock. 
The whole purpose of starting the session at 1:30 p.m. has been defeated.  
I do not think it is correct, unless there is an urgency, for committees to sit at the same time as the chamber. 
This is not for appearances' sake, but because the work done here can often be as important in the debates as what goes on in committees. 
At various stages of our work - the introduction of bills, second reading, committee referral, then third reading - we are often doing several at the same time. 
Sometimes even two, three or four committees are sitting when we are sitting. 
That is an improper practice.  
If the deputy leader could guarantee to us that, on Wednesdays from now on - and we will strive to be cooperative - we will sit no later than 3:30 p.m., unless there is a proven urgency, then I think Senator Stewart's motion is in order. 
However, we need that assurance first.  
Senator Carstairs :
Let me assure the Leader and Deputy Leader of the Opposition that we will do everything on our part to ensure that sessions end on time. 
We did sit yesterday, which was a Monday. 
I can assure senators we will be sitting next Monday in order to fulfil the business of the chamber before the Christmas break.  
Senator Kinsella :
On that basis, I do not think leave is necessary.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is leave granted?  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
He just felt it was not necessary.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
 He was a man of sound judgment , full of practical common sense , wisdom and moderation , greatly devoted to the public good , and appreciative of how lucky we were to live this wonderful country .
 . devoted and greatly wonderful man , practical were live the sense was of to , lucky public to He common judgment a wisdom appreciative country of good and moderation of , full how , in sound this
 to the , , full wonderful of and was , how moderation a He sense live good in , practical were to devoted greatly man country and judgment public of sound of lucky common this appreciative wisdom we
 to to and full lucky and was , country man wisdom we this sound were of greatly good judgment devoted , of , in appreciative a live the common moderation wonderful sense public of practical . , how
Of humble Sicilian origins, Senator Rizzuto earned his laurels here through hard and honest work in a developing market.  
 through humble his Of hard here Senator in . , and origins honest earned developing Rizzuto work a Sicilian laurels market
 hard a work . honest market , in Rizzuto developing his Senator Of origins through and humble Sicilian laurels earned here
 Of Rizzuto hard here and origins a laurels humble Senator developing market his through in earned work Sicilian , honest .
 earned Rizzuto hard laurels honest Of origins , market a Senator his humble and here . developing in through Sicilian work
 developing Rizzuto humble . through Senator here in Sicilian , work market a his earned and laurels honest origins Of hard
 laurels here and earned humble a . hard Sicilian market through Rizzuto developing in his Senator origins honest work , Of
 earned in origins honest humble laurels through here a . Senator and work his Of Sicilian developing Rizzuto hard market ,
 a Rizzuto market laurels developing Sicilian here in through Of work origins honest . humble hard and Senator his earned ,
 market Senator hard humble in Rizzuto through . earned his , and Sicilian Of honest origins work here developing a laurels
 in Senator Of his work developing . earned humble and honest market Rizzuto through laurels a hard Sicilian origins here ,
 . , humble work origins in and market developing Rizzuto laurels a hard Sicilian earned through here his Of Senator honest
 Sicilian Senator work in Rizzuto market here a through . hard humble , and his laurels honest origins developing earned Of
 earned Of a honest humble here Senator work hard Sicilian through developing market his , in origins Rizzuto laurels and .
 and laurels earned humble a Senator . work here in market honest , origins his Sicilian through hard Of developing Rizzuto
 here through humble hard honest Senator Of work laurels his Rizzuto a . earned developing origins Sicilian , market and in
 and his , in here a market honest . laurels Of Rizzuto work earned Senator through Sicilian hard developing origins humble
Hon. Donald H. Oliver :
As the honourable leader knows, the Department of Immigration maintains detention facilities across the country. 
Can he tell us how many refugee claimants are presently in detention, the number of centres, and the annual cost to Canadians to maintain these centres?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Fisheries and Oceans 
Negotiations on Multilateral Agreement on Investment-Continuation of Limit on Foreign Ownership of Commercial Licences-Government Position 
Hon. Gérald J. Comeau :
Honourable senators, my question to the Leader of the Government in the Senate is in regard to the Multilateral Agreement on Investment. 
One of the fundamental objectives of the MAI is to treat non-resident investors as if they were domestic investors; what is called the national treatment principle. 
The government assures us that attempts will be made to protect our culture, but the government has also been very vague on the other important sectors of our economy.  
Would the minister, therefore, advise this house whether our negotiators will seek to continue the 49-per-cent foreign ownership limit on commercial fishing licences in Canada?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, I am not sure what is the present position. 
I presume that my honourable friend is correct in his assumption, but I will have the matter clarified.  
Senator Comeau :
I might advise the minister that indeed there is a 49-per-cent limit on foreign ownership of licences. 
Unfortunately, almost nothing has been said by the negotiators as to how they will handle these extremely important issues that impact on all the coastal communities of Canada.  
As a supplementary, would the minister also advise whether the government negotiators have been consulting with the fishing industry on this subject? 
If so, what has been the government's position in relation to the fishing industry?  
Senator Graham :
 Of Sicilian origins , Senator Rizzuto earned his laurels here through hard and honest work in a developing market .
 developing and his hard Sicilian through Rizzuto Senator laurels a here earned , origins Of in honest work humble .
 , and . in developing work Rizzuto hard humble his honest a market origins Senator Sicilian earned Of here through
 here a work Rizzuto earned market origins Of hard in his laurels Sicilian through and . developing , honest humble
He had a strong sense of family, and his investments here and elsewhere provided much work to his family members and to many of his fellow countrymen.  
 much and and of provided his to of fellow a to had . family his many sense , strong work members his countrymen and investments family elsewhere He here
 here had and provided many sense He . fellow and investments countrymen of work his family members much his elsewhere to his of and strong family , a to
 . strong and investments He a work fellow sense his family of many family members to his provided and , of here and much to countrymen had elsewhere his
 here fellow countrymen and , a elsewhere members provided of work and family his sense . family He much of strong to many and his to investments his had
 countrymen many , his of family . investments work and to and his his family elsewhere a sense to much provided and fellow strong members had He of here
 elsewhere provided and and of had to many his work a much of family here investments his . sense members He and family fellow his , strong countrymen to
 members here . much , many investments to provided countrymen had his of a fellow strong family his his elsewhere to family sense and He and and of work
 had his family much fellow here of elsewhere and to a investments sense He his , to family members strong work and provided many his countrymen and . of
 elsewhere his members provided investments to of , sense here to fellow had his a countrymen family his strong family and and He much of . and many work
 much of elsewhere and . , He here his family fellow countrymen of his to sense and strong work members had investments his family many a and to provided
 a his to of , countrymen of strong family . his and many and provided his elsewhere members much family here had fellow investments sense to and work He
 much his had many a strong family to his provided and and his of investments family fellow here He members countrymen to work , and sense of elsewhere .
 He many family his and his his members had and . countrymen sense here , of to a family to of provided investments and elsewhere fellow strong work much
 to countrymen here his , provided investments . of and had fellow work sense his and and family of many much to members elsewhere He his a strong family
 his family members family work , elsewhere his had provided here and many and his to investments of He and fellow countrymen a to strong . of sense much
 of . here elsewhere his his had of his countrymen family and and and strong investments provided members He a fellow , to work sense many much family to
In effect, that will keep things in relative control.  
It should have been explained to Canadians that the government explored that method and rejected it for specific reasons. 
As others have said before me, people are living longer. 
While the age of 65 was formerly not achieved by many, it is being achieved by most today. 
That should be taken into consideration as a basis for increasing the age for retirement because it will decrease the burden on the young people who today believe that they will have to pay the whole shot for us.  
Senator Oliver continued: 
Honourable senators, in these times of slowing real incomes, increasing long-term interest rates, high personal taxes, increased CPP premiums, and ridiculously high EI premiums, where does the Leader of the Government believe that Canadians, who will receive less money from public plans, will find money to put away in their RRSPs to secure their own retirements?  
On November 6, Senator Oliver asked: 
Honourable senators, in 1995, the Department of Finance conducted a study on the impact of the increase in CPP premiums between 1986 and 1995. 
During that period, employee contributions rose from 1.85 per cent to 2.25 per cent of earnings, and the combined rate rose from 3.6 to 5 per cent.  
How many Canadians must pay the price for the planned increase in premiums?  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, I regret to interrupt the honourable senator, but his allotted time has expired.  
Senator Stratton :
I would like to finish my speech, if I may.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is leave granted for Honourable Senator Stratton to continue?  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
Senator Stratton :
 He had a strong sense family , and his investments here and elsewhere provided much work to his family members and to many of his fellow countrymen .
 investments strong provided here sense to and family of work of his He to fellow his family a and much members and . his countrymen elsewhere , had
 of countrymen his , of and family a much many to and had provided his . and his fellow here investments elsewhere sense He to strong family work
 much . to to and strong of , his had provided and He his family fellow elsewhere here a many work sense countrymen and of investments family his
His funeral, held at Laval-sur-le-Lac, was heavily attended and was evidence to us all of the important place he held within his family and his community. 
 of us - , place was and sur evidence - within he important attended Laval funeral heavily community - his the to held and was held , Lac family . his at His le all
 le place was and heavily - attended evidence his funeral he all - the to , His held important sur - was us within community of Laval and , at his held Lac . family
 - funeral , Lac - and important evidence His was Laval the his and held le sur at . attended community was he all of held to heavily within family place his us , -
 within his . , attended - held was to family - Laval he important le sur all - was and of community place His Lac evidence the , at held funeral his heavily us and
 of - sur within important he , - to attended and Lac place the . family held community Laval evidence was heavily - and His his his le us held was all at funeral ,
 was - at his us sur his Laval His community funeral important family , . of the he Lac within was held - and all to , held le place and evidence heavily - attended
 and was sur he of important within his held heavily us was to , - and his the - evidence Laval attended His at held funeral Lac le community family all . - place ,
 , community was heavily was His le place held , funeral us evidence Lac and - and attended at the Laval he his all family within . of his - important to held sur -
 us was sur held within was of he heavily , and attended held his at the all . to funeral - family le and place his important community , Laval His - evidence Lac -
 was attended heavily community , us held to his at the Lac held his - family of important and and le evidence funeral , - within place Laval His all . was he - sur
 of , - Laval all was was sur important his held family within at held Lac . heavily and to , the us attended His evidence - le he his - and community place funeral
 he community of attended at . his , evidence and , - - held Laval held was his - to us the sur important heavily place all Lac was funeral family within le His and
 his was of family us evidence attended was Laval important sur Lac , held and place and to - funeral - community held the his heavily le at His he all within . - ,
 at family Laval and of attended and all us he - place was his his held within the His evidence . to le community Lac funeral was - , held , important - heavily sur
 Laval he His his place heavily was to his at - Lac - , le and and all evidence , was us attended held community family . the of - important within sur funeral held
 was the attended held . us all Laval , - and , heavily within place His Lac sur - community held - he his funeral his evidence and family at to le was important of
SENATORS' STATEMENTS 
The Senate 
Response to Newspaper Article on Senator's Residency Qualifications 
Hon. Colin Kenny :
Honourable senators, I rise today on behalf of a colleague who cannot be present, Senator Paul Lucier. 
Senator Lucier has sent me a fax which he has asked me to communicate to the chamber. 
For your benefit, he wants me to reply to the comments made about him in the media recently.  
He writes: 
I would like to make some points with respect to this matter: 
The Citizen said: "Paul Lucier said the Senate's legal staff approved his change in residency five years ago when he moved to Vancouver."  
Senator Lucier says: 
This is not true. 
I never spoke with legal staff five years ago about this. 
I never had any problem about residency.  
2. The Citizen said: "He said Senate staff told him he could keep his seat as long as he continues to own property in the Yukon."  
Senator Lucier replies: 
Again, I never spoke to the staff and was therefore never told any such comment. 
On my attendance, 21 % (19 out of 87 sittings), and on the statement: "He says - 
Senator Lucier has underlined the word "says."  
- he has bone cancer and must live in the British Columbia city for treatments".  
 His funeral , held at Laval - sur - le - Lac , was heavily attended and was evidence to us all of the important place he held within his family and his community
 funeral was and Lac sur his heavily family he held , was place us held the His within community of attended - . le - and , important his - to at evidence all
 community evidence he held - the , sur and held attended le all . was heavily his his - and us Lac place His at family within , important to of was - Laval
 to community , he important - - His his within family Lac attended was heavily - Laval all , held and le at place the funeral sur was . of his us and held
It moved us all to see the Bishop weeping for the loss of his brother Pietro.  
 us the all his of moved Bishop brother for the loss see . It to weeping Pietro
 the loss for Bishop all . see to of his us It moved Pietro weeping the brother
 all weeping of the loss for It . us his Bishop to brother moved the see Pietro
 weeping Pietro loss for of his the the moved It see to Bishop all us brother .
 see . brother moved for Pietro his It the us to weeping loss all of Bishop the
 the It see us Pietro his weeping all the for Bishop loss to moved . brother of
 brother loss It see for his all us Bishop Pietro the the moved . of weeping to
 brother loss the of his weeping the Pietro us see It for . all Bishop to moved
 brother loss all the to his the see of moved It for Bishop weeping Pietro . us
 Bishop the weeping to Pietro his brother loss see moved . us It for the of all
 the to the . all loss Bishop Pietro weeping brother of moved us for his see It
 his loss Bishop the . the of weeping to us for moved It brother Pietro see all
 weeping of It his see all . loss to Pietro the the for moved Bishop us brother
 Bishop all the It the us . see brother of for Pietro weeping his loss moved to
 brother to moved his . Pietro see Bishop of the weeping us the for It loss all
 the see It for all . the weeping Pietro us brother moved of his Bishop to loss
I will leave it to each senator to come to his or her own conclusion on the testimony and on the letters, which are appended to the report.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Honourable senators, Senator Grafstein is quite right in stating that reform is needed. 
Actually, reform is well under way in Quebec. 
The new system, it seems, will be in place for the next school year. 
New linguistic boards will be set up. 
There will be some difficulties, but, overall, it is proceeding quite well.  
What linkage is there between the new school system in Quebec and the request to exempt Quebec from certain obligations of section 93? 
I do not see any.  
Senator Grafstein :
Honourable senators, there is constitutional law. 
Quebec wants to proceed by the rule of law. 
They are seeking to renovate their system under the rule of law and the Constitution.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
That is not my question.  
Senator Grafstein :
I assume that if they choose to proceed, they can. 
However, why should we in the Senate allow any province to proceed in a way that we consider unlawful? 
If there is an amendment to the Constitution, each senator in his or her heart and mind, after reviewing the testimony, must come to a conclusion. 
He or she can either vote for, against or abstain from the vote on the resolution.  
 It moved us all to see the Bishop weeping for loss of his brother Pietro .
 . of see Pietro weeping for It brother the the loss to Bishop moved his us
 It see all brother . the the Bishop his moved to weeping loss for of Pietro
 of . brother for It Bishop all the moved the to us loss his Pietro see
His immigration in the 1950s marked the start of a rise to the upper ranks of the Canadian public service, based on that quiet strength that is the mark of greatness.  
 His 1950s start marked that is the Canadian the on . strength , ranks to public mark of upper the quiet service a the based rise of in the immigration that of greatness
 ranks in that start of immigration is . the public , of rise the the the strength based service greatness to upper a of mark Canadian marked the His quiet on 1950s that
 the 1950s greatness in that . rise the ranks service a start upper His based on is mark the of public of , the to the of that Canadian immigration marked quiet strength
 the public that ranks strength a quiet , mark service of . upper of is Canadian that greatness to the immigration 1950s the start in the marked on based of the rise His
 of of service marked strength quiet based His to of . , is in that ranks that the the start 1950s public the the upper the greatness Canadian a immigration on rise mark
 in greatness ranks on mark the the of 1950s upper the rise is quiet the . immigration marked of , public to Canadian the of strength a start His service that based that
 that Canadian upper to 1950s the is rise of start strength of marked that on the the His in of quiet , a based immigration the the public ranks greatness mark service .
 rise , . that the of quiet start ranks the greatness on service public to that upper Canadian 1950s in of marked the the His a immigration the strength based is of mark
 Canadian of is to mark , service the upper of based of that quiet His 1950s marked public on the a . that the rise greatness in immigration strength ranks the the start
 to Canadian that public in a strength the on the is ranks of greatness His . , quiet of service rise marked the start 1950s the upper of that based immigration the mark
 upper , on in public start the greatness that marked His that to . of the service rise strength a the based quiet the immigration ranks the 1950s of Canadian of is mark
 greatness ranks that public Canadian to strength quiet of of service , 1950s . the rise of the the mark His upper marked immigration on based start that the is a in the
 of the the His upper start public service 1950s strength marked . the the mark on the is based , that to immigration of a greatness that of ranks Canadian in quiet rise
 that that marked upper the His service the immigration of quiet 1950s based , on start is ranks . of Canadian in mark rise strength public the the a the to greatness of
 is upper mark on marked strength , 1950s the immigration the the start in of the the to a . of of greatness ranks rise that public Canadian service His based that quiet
 immigration of , the the rise of of 1950s to on the greatness service the in public that mark His based the start upper quiet ranks Canadian marked that a is . strength
The issue is that Wednesday, in our common understanding, was to be a short day to allow committees to sit on Wednesday afternoons.  
Not just today but at other times, Senator Stewart has brought to our attention the fact that committees operate on that assumption and arrange their business plans, only to be frustrated in executing their business plan by the Senate going way beyond 3:00 or 3:30 p.m. on Wednesday afternoons.  
Senator Stewart has explained to us that that is the main concern. 
He would like some assurance from the leadership on both sides that, on Wednesdays, we would try harder to respect that tradition. 
We on this side agree to make every effort to complete our work on Wednesday afternoons at around 3:00 or 3:15 p.m. If you can also agree, perhaps we do not need to have this motion.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, is leave granted?  
Senator Kinsella :
It depends upon the answer.  
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, we must make an effort to allow committees to sit. 
They do invite witnesses, many of whom come from out of town. 
We inconvenience them if we are not able to hear from them.  
I must congratulate senators on this side who have refrained, for the most part, from making Senators' Statements on Wednesdays, unless it was something quite urgent, as was Senator Kenny's statement today. 
They have tried to make their speeches on either Tuesdays or Thursdays. 
Senators on the other side have attempted to do the same thing. 
With that level of cooperation, perhaps at some time in the future we can invoke a more formal process whereby there will be some guarantee to committee chairs.  
Barring that formal process, Senator Stewart has witnesses to hear from tomorrow, and I should like him to have permission to hear those witnesses tomorrow.  
Hon. John Lynch-Staunton (Leader of the Opposition) :
That worked for a while. 
 His immigration in the 1950s marked the start of a rise to the upper ranks of the Canadian public service , based on that quiet strength that is mark of greatness .
 service a strength quiet the public immigration of upper is to ranks on , 1950s Canadian of mark the the the that in the His . greatness start of rise based that
 the mark the of of in , greatness start the a quiet the on Canadian 1950s immigration that upper the . strength that to is ranks marked rise His based of public
 quiet in upper on that rise to of , a the immigration ranks 1950s marked the mark the the based is start His strength that service public Canadian of of . greatness
Hon. Joyce Fairbairn :
 Hon : . Fairbairn Joyce
 Fairbairn Joyce Hon . :
 Joyce Hon . Fairbairn :
 Hon Joyce Fairbairn : .
 : Hon Joyce . Fairbairn
 Hon Fairbairn . : Joyce
 Hon : . Joyce Fairbairn
 Joyce : . Fairbairn Hon
 Fairbairn Hon : Joyce .
 Fairbairn Joyce Hon : .
 Fairbairn : Hon Joyce .
 Joyce : Fairbairn Hon .
 Joyce : Hon Fairbairn .
 Joyce : Fairbairn Hon .
 : Joyce . Fairbairn Hon
 Hon Joyce Fairbairn : .
Therefore, the federal requirement that all federal laws must comply with the Charter of Rights and Freedoms was not affected.  
Yesterday, Senator Beaudoin was explaining the different parts of the Constitution, the British North America Act of 1867, the Charter of Rights, and so on. 
At times, it appears the Supreme Court of Canada considers that the Constitution consists only of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 
Despite all the evidence - the stolen truck, the blood on the accused - the judges were only interested in one thing, and that was the arrest warrant. 
There was no warrant because the police acted on the spot when they had the accused, and I think they acted quite properly.  
Honourable senators, the Supreme Court ignored the rights of Mr. Boyle. 
Section 7 of the Charter indicates that Mr. Boyle had the right to life, privacy and security of the person, and those rights were not to be taken from him except by and in accordance with the principles of fundamental justice.  
I think the justices of the Supreme Court of Canada should be sent a message reminding them that the victim also had rights under the Charter.  
In all fairness, honourable senators, I must say that three of the justices dissented with the majority decision. 
They felt the police action had no bearing or outcome on the decision. 
The chief justice came down the middle and quoted the decision made by former chief justice Brian Dickson, which I understand finds that, if the subject is not spelled out in the Constitution, it is implied as being there. 
However, there again, that is merely my interpretation.  
I emphasize again that Mr. Boyle had the right to his life. 
He had the right to have a vehicle and operate it, and he had the right to have money in his possession. 
All those were taken away from him, and all the Supreme Court of Canada could think of was that piece of paper called a "warrant" and to criticize the police for not having such a document.  
I wanted to suggest that perhaps criminals should apply for a warrant before they commit murder, but I do not want to pursue that because I am afraid that some Charter judge will give them a warrant or a licence to do so. 
Fifteen years ago, I would have been shocked at criticism of a decision rendered by the Supreme Court; but, today that is commonplace. 
When a major decision comes down from the Supreme Court, the media is there to interview people who wish to comment, mostly negatively, on the decision. 
As I stated, we would not have seen a headline like that 15 years ago.  
That is their function, and Parliament has referred it to them. 
 Hon . Joyce Fairbairn
 Joyce Fairbairn . Hon
 Fairbairn Hon Joyce .
 Hon Joyce . Fairbairn
Honourable senators, I wish to pay tribute as well to a friend of some 20 years who has left us far too soon.  
 years , Honourable 20 senators soon who has left a pay friend to I well wish . far as tribute some to us of too
 has soon who well Honourable years wish I . to of us far too senators some tribute as , to a 20 left pay friend
 who tribute some soon wish as . of a senators far , to too friend years left us well I to Honourable 20 has pay
 of pay a to senators tribute , too to wish well who has Honourable I as friend years . some 20 left soon us far
 wish as , years well . some left Honourable senators who us of I pay has a too 20 tribute soon to to friend far
 us left senators to far pay has as well friend years , 20 Honourable who of I too wish soon . to a tribute some
 pay of a tribute years as some , us well . senators has to to Honourable too soon friend who far left I 20 wish
 , Honourable years senators to tribute to left of who some has far I soon well friend pay wish . us too 20 a as
 friend . a , I well who tribute Honourable too 20 as wish us to some left of years far to pay senators soon has
 to 20 Honourable has who soon of a . I , far left pay as tribute well years too friend wish some us to senators
 us soon some to of has friend too wish well pay tribute left 20 a far I , senators as . Honourable to years who
 pay I to years tribute 20 soon friend too to a well as senators of . some , has far Honourable wish us who left
 I Honourable soon , pay to years us a who senators tribute well left as wish 20 some . of too to friend has far
 soon us of . Honourable as a well to I years pay friend tribute far left 20 , too who has to wish some senators
 . friend of some left to soon us to pay tribute a I Honourable years who wish , senators far well 20 as too has
 senators 20 Honourable friend too well has us of tribute . some years far I as a to who to wish , soon left pay
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Informetrica Study on Meeting Targets-Government Position 
Hon. Mira Spivak :
Honourable senators, late last week, the consulting firm Informetrica released a study entitled, "The Scale of the Challenge for Reducing Canadian Greenhouse Gas Emissions." 
This report states: 
We conclude that there is almost no chance of meeting this goal in Canada under any reasonable economic scenario...  
And I stress this last part: 
...given current commitments to action.  
Could the Leader of the Government tell us if the relevant ministers are aware of this study, whether there have been any responses, or what the reaction has been to this prestigious firm's study?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
It provides very important data. 
I am not sure the government would necessarily agree with the findings of the study but, certainly, those findings will be taken into consideration.  
Senator Spivak :
I am glad to hear that.  
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Concept of Differing Targets-Government Position 
Hon. Mira Spivak :
In the current discussions in Kyoto, the idea of tailoring reductions targets to individual countries' economic and social profiles rather than having a one-size-fits-all commitment has gained some currency, particularly in view of the most recent American proposal. 
Where does the Canadian delegation stand with respect to this concept?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government):
Honourable senators, the media is reporting, of course, on a possible deal on targets and time-tables which could see Canada accepting a reduction of 5 per cent from 1990 levels bythe year 2010. 
At this point, these reports are speculative, but negotiations are ongoing.  
 Honourable senators , I wish to pay tribute as well to friend of some 20 years who has left us far too soon .
 of to friend who well us 20 , left far some tribute years has . as to soon wish I senators too Honourable a
 . friend to has Honourable a , senators well tribute I us pay years as soon to wish some who of far too 20
 of tribute has left Honourable some , years to I to soon too who us . 20 well pay wish as a far senators
Senator Pietro Rizzuto was, as others have said, a loyal Canadian. 
 , Senator said Pietro loyal Canadian others have Rizzuto . as , was a
 said loyal Senator , have Canadian others was . Pietro Rizzuto a , as
 , have was . loyal others Pietro a as said Senator , Canadian Rizzuto
 Rizzuto a Pietro said Canadian Senator others , loyal as was . , have
 Canadian others Senator . was Pietro , loyal as a said have Rizzuto ,
 was , Pietro said Senator Canadian , others have a . Rizzuto loyal as
 loyal . Canadian Pietro others said Senator as was a have , , Rizzuto
 loyal Senator others Pietro Rizzuto was have , , as said Canadian a .
 as . Canadian , Pietro said loyal Rizzuto , have Senator was a others
 a , others Pietro Rizzuto Senator as loyal . , have said was Canadian
 Rizzuto was Canadian others as , . said loyal have , Senator a Pietro
 a Pietro was Canadian as loyal have , Rizzuto , others . said Senator
 said , . as Pietro loyal others was Senator a , Canadian Rizzuto have
 as Rizzuto a have Pietro Senator , loyal others said Canadian was . ,
 others a , was have Senator said , Rizzuto as Pietro loyal . Canadian
 , . loyal said Rizzuto a Canadian others was Pietro have as , Senator
It must be ensured that a conflict of interest of this kind is not permitted at all. 
I will return to this shortly.  
My fourth point concerns investment policy. 
The law should provide that the administrators of the fund are responsible for ensuring contributors a reasonable pension, while providing them with the best return, that is, the safest and best return possible.  
Canada's economy represents about 2.5 per cent of the world economy. 
So it would be wise to permit the fund not only to diversify its investments in stocks and bonds but also to invest worldwide. 
Diversification of values, in a variety of instruments, in various sectors, in different countries and currencies is thus a measure of wisdom and judgement to be left to those in charge, who must, of course, be accountable for their actions.  
Honourable senators, it would be tempting for the administrators to act as investors on occasion by investing in all sorts of businesses with their judgement either arbitrary or verging on patronage. 
We have seen this in Quebec. 
There must be strict rules to prevent this sort of thing, if we want to avoid regrettable misuse.  
The matter of the pension plan's objectives is basic. 
In this respect, the legislation must be clear. 
The board must first and foremost look after the interests of the contributors whose income security depends on its performance to a large extent.  
The history of the Quebec Caisse de dépôt et placement warrants examination in this regard. 
In the mid-1960s, at the time it was set up, Mr. Lesage, the Premier of Quebec at the time, described it as an instrument of social security. 
He added, at the instigation of some, that it would also be an instrument of economic development, with the result that, little by little, the managers who were not sufficiently dynamic in the eyes of the directors were replaced. 
It was not Mr. Caouette's money, it was real bucks. 
The second director was also an experienced investment fund manager, but the government changed in Quebec, and we ended up with people who were more dynamic and who wanted to direct the economy. 
That is when it was decided that the people running the Caisse were not dynamic enough and had to be replaced. 
That was done. 
 Senator Pietro Rizzuto was , as have said , a loyal Canadian .
 , . Rizzuto Canadian others , as loyal have was Senator said a
 was as , loyal Rizzuto . said a Canadian have Senator , Pietro
 as was , Senator Rizzuto . said Canadian loyal , a have others
He was a loyal Quebecer. 
 a loyal Quebecer . He was
 a . loyal He was Quebecer
 Quebecer He loyal was a .
 was Quebecer He loyal a .
 was Quebecer . loyal He a
 a Quebecer He was . loyal
 . was He Quebecer a loyal
 was Quebecer He a . loyal
 was a . loyal Quebecer He
 Quebecer He a loyal . was
 . was He Quebecer a loyal
 was . a Quebecer loyal He
 Quebecer He . loyal was a
 loyal He a was . Quebecer
 loyal He . was a Quebecer
 . loyal a was Quebecer He
It takes strength and intelligence.  
Senator Moore :
Meaning we are not intelligent?  
Senator Gigantès :
Not as much as the women are.  
Senator Tkachuk :
Then the benefits were extended. 
The provision went from having to live together for seven years to share in CPP benefits - in other words, when one died the other one would pick up the cash - down to one year. 
If you lived together for one year, the other person was considered your husband or your wife, and benefits again were extended to the surviving spouse - another increased cost.  
Yesterday, Senator Kirby alluded to the possibility that there may be other social changes in those arrangements. 
I know what that means. 
It is possible that governments may recognize gay marriages, and I think he wanted to let us know that there may be these kinds of changes taking place. 
That is fine, if the government wants to do that. 
Now you have two guys living together; one dies, the other one is picking up some cash. 
That costs more money. 
Well, two guys who live together for one year may not be gay. 
How would you know?  
Senator Gigantès :
You want surveillance cameras?  
Senator Tkachuk :
 was a loyal Quebecer .
 He was . loyal Quebecer
 . loyal Quebecer He was
 a loyal He . was
There was never any doubt where Senator Rizzuto stood when it came to his country. 
 Rizzuto his where . country came doubt when it Senator any stood There never to was
 where . to doubt any Senator stood it There his Rizzuto was came never country when
 . country There doubt Rizzuto was when came Senator stood where to it never any his
 his doubt . to when where Rizzuto was came Senator stood any country never There it
 where doubt Senator came any never was to . Rizzuto stood There it his country when
 where his stood . was Senator doubt to it country when any came never There Rizzuto
 any doubt his where was it Senator There never to came Rizzuto stood when . country
 came it . any country Rizzuto where never was his doubt stood There when Senator to
 to it came There Senator never . Rizzuto country any stood was his doubt where when
 Rizzuto Senator country when doubt There it any his stood came was . where to never
 was when There where . his Senator doubt came any Rizzuto to country never stood it
 where . doubt Rizzuto to it when stood country never Senator came any There was his
 Rizzuto it never country to where stood came . Senator was There doubt his any when
 where his doubt was Senator country There Rizzuto any to never . came when stood it
 his it any There country never stood to when was Rizzuto doubt Senator came where .
 when stood There country to was doubt his . any it came Senator never Rizzuto where
The following year, in 1999-2000, they will only be $3.748 billion. 
Yet, the government claimed yesterday that it was implementing a stable transfer system. 
In fact, cash payments paid to Quebec for health and education will be reduced by over $300 million over a five-year period. 
Honourable senators, I remind you that these cuts are in addition to this year's reduction of $700 million compared to last year. 
Could the minister make inquiries and inform the Senate of the reasons why, in spite of a cash floor set at $12.5 billion, Quebec's share will diminish by $307 million over the next five years?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
The federal government cut its own spending earlier, more drastically and in greater measure than transfers to the provinces. 
The government has made it clear that it will use increased fiscal flexibility to make strategic investments in priority areas, and action was taken early and directly on that commitment based on favourable fiscal results that emerged this past spring.  
With respect to individual provinces, I do not have those numbers. 
However, I would be happy to provide them for my honourable friend.  
Senator Roberge :
Could the minister find out at the same time why, in the same time period, Ontario's share of the cash transfers will increase to $173 million?  
Senator Graham :
Yes. 
While I am doing that, I should like to remind the honourable senator that even before the federal government balances the books, it is putting more money into transfers to the provinces. 
In fact, the government is raising the cash floor from $11 billion to $12.5 billion, the single largest reinvestment made by the federal government. 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Provinces-Effect on Atlantic Provinces 
Hon. Mabel M. DeWare :
Honourable senators, my figures show that, four years ago, the provinces received more than $19 billion in cash transfers for health, education and welfare through what was then known as the Canadian Assistance Program and Established Programs Financing. 
The government's math provides some good news, as the original plan was to give them even less.  
 There was never any doubt where Senator Rizzuto stood when it came to country .
 never came stood any when Rizzuto There where it his to . was Senator doubt
 Rizzuto his when any Senator . doubt stood it was to never where came There
 his Rizzuto came There . was Senator where when it to stood never country any
He was a devoted federalist and active in promoting Canadian unity with an almost fervent passion and conviction. 
 in fervent conviction devoted promoting and a with federalist unity active and . almost was an passion He Canadian
 and was devoted an promoting federalist fervent and with Canadian passion conviction unity a active . He almost in
 unity fervent He almost Canadian with in devoted . and promoting passion conviction an a was federalist active and
 He passion and was an conviction unity and with in fervent promoting active a almost devoted federalist . Canadian
 active a an with and promoting . fervent was and federalist unity Canadian almost passion He devoted in conviction
 and passion a almost He . an in devoted unity and with conviction was federalist fervent promoting active Canadian
 conviction He promoting and fervent and unity in federalist . a devoted an with almost Canadian passion was active
 active almost an and in unity fervent and . Canadian passion a He promoting was conviction federalist devoted with
 unity and active promoting in was conviction . with Canadian an He almost federalist and devoted fervent passion a
 Canadian almost unity active was passion federalist promoting devoted and and an fervent He with conviction . in a
 passion was with a devoted an and . Canadian promoting fervent in federalist almost unity active He and conviction
 unity passion fervent an and and He almost promoting a with . was devoted in federalist Canadian conviction active
 a passion promoting and Canadian an conviction federalist almost active in and He was unity fervent . devoted with
 active He federalist an was promoting a with Canadian almost and unity fervent and devoted passion . conviction in
 almost . with was He and conviction an fervent devoted passion and unity a in promoting active Canadian federalist
 Canadian active and passion in promoting federalist an almost unity He devoted and fervent was . with a conviction
The Catholics were represented by English-speaking priests.  
Again, in Senator Bolduc's thoughtful speech, he refers to these groups. 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, I regret to interrupt once again. 
The clock now says six o'clock.  
Senator Carstairs :
There is agreement that we will not see the clock, Your Honour.  
Senator Grafstein :
It is not clear to me whether these witnesses represented the entire spectrum of the groups for whom they spoke. 
Having said that, their rights are of concern.  
However, it is clear that denominational teaching will continue inside the province of Quebec by Quebec law.  
It is difficult to see how their accessibility to denominational teaching in the public school system will be abrogated in the short run. 
Obviously, it is no small solace, unlike the case for many years in the province of Ontario, that minority denominational rights, religious education, was achieved, in part, through public funding in the province of Quebec. In other words, as Senator Lavoie-Roux pointed out, in the province of Ontario there is and was no public funding of other religious or denominational schools, unlike Ontario. 
I want to make specific reference to this point because I have some personal experience in this regard. 
Access to public funding in Quebec for denominational education remains available in Quebec. 
I find it hard to believe how the Province of Quebec in the future, even if the notwithstanding clauses are removed, would not continue to fund denominational training. 
Whether it is through a charter school, a public school system, or through a publicly funded private school system, denominational training to all groups, in my view, will continue in the province of Quebec for the foreseeable future.  
Since we are projecting the future, that is my prediction for the future.  
I wish to mention yet another aspect of the testimony referred to in the Reform Party opinion which is appended to the report.  
At the last minute, after all the testimony was taken, the Reform members of the committee introduced a long petition containing thousands of names objecting to the federal resolution. 
 He was a devoted federalist and active in promoting Canadian unity an almost fervent passion and conviction .
 and unity He and active federalist devoted promoting almost fervent Canadian was passion with a . an conviction
 Canadian an in . was passion devoted active a with conviction and almost fervent promoting and He unity
 . an unity Canadian fervent conviction federalist devoted and was and almost with He promoting a active passion
He also was extremely active in the Liberal Party of Canada, of which he was tremendously proud.  
 extremely proud was of he He also Liberal of . tremendously Party Canada in active which the was ,
 proud he . the also He active Liberal tremendously which of Party , Canada was of in extremely was
 Canada was Liberal active also of he was which of proud , in Party the extremely He tremendously .
 also Party was he . of the was tremendously extremely of in He Liberal , which proud Canada active
 was Canada He tremendously was . Liberal the which of he active , also in of proud Party extremely
 the He , extremely also was which proud Canada . of tremendously Party of Liberal he active in was
 proud of tremendously He Canada was , Party . the in of Liberal he active also was which extremely
 was . also He , Liberal of Party Canada he the which extremely was tremendously of active proud in
 proud active He Canada he was Liberal tremendously also of Party in which was of extremely the . ,
 . proud also in He was tremendously the was of Liberal which Canada he of extremely active Party ,
 the proud in extremely Canada was of he also He tremendously of . Liberal Party was , which active
 the . Liberal of He , of proud active which he tremendously was extremely was Canada also in Party
 of which in Canada proud extremely he He active of Liberal Party the also was tremendously , . was
 proud Canada the extremely active . , of Party was Liberal He in was also which of he tremendously
 was . Canada which active Liberal of also He , the was proud he extremely of Party tremendously in
 in was the He he active Party of of Canada Liberal also . , was which tremendously proud extremely
Is it your pleasure, honourable senators, to adopt the motion?  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
Motion agreed to.  
The Senate 
Conduct of Business-Notice of Inquiry 
Hon. William M. Kelly :
Honourable senators, I give notice: 
That on Thursday next, December 11, 1997, I will call the attention of the Senate to the way in which the Senate conducts its business.  
QUESTION PERIOD 
Federal-Provincial Relations 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Province of Quebec-Request for Particulars 
Hon. Fernand Roberge :
Honourable senators, my question follows the announcement made yesterday regarding the government's decision to set at $12.5 billion the cash floor for transfer payments made under the Canada health and social transfer (CHST). 
The government would have us believe that this amount represents an increase in health care payments. 
However, the figures indicate otherwise.  
The following year, in 1999-2000, they will only be $3.748 billion. 
Yet, the government claimed yesterday that it was implementing a stable transfer system. 
In fact, cash payments paid to Quebec for health and education will be reduced by over $300 million over a five-year period. 
Honourable senators, I remind you that these cuts are in addition to this year's reduction of $700 million compared to last year. 
 He was extremely active in the Liberal Party of Canada , of which he was tremendously proud .
 of proud also . Party the active was He he which tremendously extremely was , Canada of Liberal
 tremendously extremely . which was Party Canada active of also of proud he He was the in Liberal
 he which proud of Liberal also , Party . He of extremely active tremendously Canada the was in
He actively pursued those convictions right to the very end.  
 those the very end to convictions right He actively pursued .
 the very actively right pursued . He convictions those to end
 He convictions end to very pursued the right those . actively
 He . right actively very the end those convictions pursued to
 those right pursued convictions He to the end very actively .
 pursued actively very those He right end . the convictions to
 pursued He those right convictions to very end the . actively
 pursued convictions those the to . right actively end He very
 . pursued very He actively convictions right end the to those
 to pursued convictions right the actively . He those very end
 end pursued very actively He those the to right . convictions
 . actively right pursued to the end very those convictions He
 the pursued to convictions very those right He . actively end
 right actively . those convictions very pursued end the He to
 to actively right those end pursued convictions He very . the
 end the very convictions He pursued . right to those actively
Honourable senators, I would refer my colleague to the transcript. 
Read the transcript. 
If there is a dispute about evidence, rather than taking my word or that of the honourable senator opposite - with whom I do disagree - senators should read the transcript. 
The transcript will speak for itself.  
Senator Lavoie-Roux :
I think all senators would have wanted to read the transcript, but we did not have enough time.  
The minister appeared before the committee on November 4. I asked him if he felt that minorities would be as well protected by section 23 of the Charter as they were by section 93 of the Constitution, and he said that they would not be as well protected.  
Senator Grafstein :
He and I have a different viewpoint on section 23(1)( a ) of the Charter.  
Hon. Dalia Wood :
Honourable senators, I have a question for the honourable senator.  
I do not agree with the concept of my honourable friend's consensus. 
Le Fédération des comités des parents de la province de Québec is a group mandated by the National Assembly to represent all parents and all schools in Quebec. 
They appeared before the committee. 
The president, Mr. Gary Stronach, when asked if the membership was aware, stated - and this is in his letter - that he did not ask his membership for their views. 
He said that he did not ask the parents whether they were for or against the amendment to section 93.  
This is one of the largest groups in Quebec. 
If Mr. Stronach is part of the "for" or "against" theory, then there is a problem with the whole concept put forth by my honourable friend.  
My honourable friend spoke of the Estates General, but he did not refer to their minority report, which covered over 70 per cent of their membership. 
Why are my figures different from those of my honourable friend?  
 He actively pursued those convictions right the very end .
 convictions those the . end very actively pursued He to
 the very to actively He convictions . those pursued end
 actively . end those He pursued the very right to
He had every reason to take pride in his opportunities and achievements in and contributions to both the public and the private sectors in Canada. 
 to pride the and every his opportunities in and had and reason achievements Canada the public . private take in in to He both sectors contributions
 in the public take to both pride Canada and every and and in achievements He his the to contributions opportunities . private had in reason sectors
 in reason the to sectors pride . achievements and He in the every in and private had contributions public both his take and Canada opportunities to
 the contributions and the sectors private achievements He Canada in his in reason take opportunities and every . in pride both and public to to had
 achievements to and . his Canada sectors the and private pride contributions public to opportunities He in both had the in in every reason and take
 in opportunities take and his private Canada the both the every pride sectors in reason had in to and contributions . public He to achievements and
 and reason his and every achievements Canada and take both sectors to in in the to private He pride . the public in had contributions opportunities
 in pride take Canada in opportunities achievements public . every reason in contributions to the both the private sectors had He to and and and his
 both take opportunities He in pride had public reason the every his contributions to the and private in and to sectors achievements and in . Canada
 public had and . achievements sectors Canada to the to every pride in and reason He contributions opportunities both take in the and his private in
 reason take . had and and sectors Canada opportunities his in private the both in every the and public contributions He to achievements to in pride
 in Canada in had opportunities in public achievements . to his every the private the take He contributions and reason and pride to sectors and both
 sectors in every and reason in take achievements in the pride and the and He opportunities . public Canada contributions both to to private had his
 the . and the and in in and reason to contributions private achievements public He every sectors his take in Canada to had pride both opportunities
 his take the contributions achievements to every and the pride to reason sectors in in in . and both Canada He public opportunities private had and
 contributions and take the pride reason his public to and to both . sectors and Canada had every He in opportunities in achievements private in the
Recent Remarks of Prime Minister-Possible Conditions of Secession of Quebec-Government Position 
Immigration 
Tracking and Detention of Unsuccessful Refugee Claimants-Government Position 
Detention Facilities for Refugee Claimants-Request for Particulars 
Fisheries and Oceans 
Negotiations on Multilateral Agreement on Investment-Continuation of Limit on Foreign Ownership of Commercial Licences-Government Position 
National Defence 
Search and Rescue Helicopter Replacement Program-Possible Cabinet Discussion on Awarding Contract for Helicopter Purchase-Government Position 
Search and Rescue Helicopter Replacement Program-State of Sea King Helicopter Fleet-Government Position 
Federal-Provincial Relations 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Atlantic Provinces Equal to Increase in Social Transfers-Government Position 
Delayed Answers to Oral Questions 
Human Resources Development 
Changes to Canada Pension Plan-Accountability and Transparency of Investment Board-Undertaking to Publish Quarterly Financial Statements-Government Position 
Changes to Canada Pension Plan-Investment Board Not Subject to Access to Information Act-Government Position 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
Commemoration of Fiftieth Anniversary-Plans of Government 
Activities planned around December 10, 1997 for the launch of the 50th Anniversary commemorative year of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) 
National Defence 
Lack of Helicopter for Number of Navy Frigates-Government Position 
 He had every reason to take pride in his opportunities and achievements in and contributions both the public and the private sectors in Canada .
 private had sectors achievements and in public pride the take contributions and Canada in to in and to He . opportunities both every the his
 in reason contributions the and the Canada He pride . in sectors public private opportunities every his take both in had and to to achievements
 in . the achievements the his contributions to and to private take He and both public opportunities Canada in and every in sectors reason pride
However, his deepest feelings were for his family whom he loved, of whom he spoke often and of whom he was tremendously proud. 
 for family was of he whom whom and tremendously , spoke his his . of loved were feelings he , However proud whom he often deepest
 whom proud loved and , whom he often his deepest he he his , for were However family whom of . was spoke feelings tremendously of
 his family whom often , , whom proud tremendously were deepest his However spoke . feelings was he of he and for of loved he whom
 whom of often whom he tremendously were , spoke However feelings . deepest of he and was family he , proud loved whom for his his
 However tremendously family often he and , were whom he he deepest for . loved whom whom proud his spoke of , feelings his of was
 his tremendously proud , he deepest and whom he feelings of whom However spoke loved was of family his whom he for , were often .
 of he his deepest feelings tremendously he his family often proud , for were whom whom and whom was , spoke he . However loved of
 often family whom he his and However he for loved were proud of deepest , , whom . tremendously of feelings he was spoke whom his
 , were he whom for proud family tremendously of of feelings was his and whom whom However . spoke his , he often he loved deepest
 his , of of whom , he his he However he loved was deepest feelings for often were proud . and whom tremendously whom family spoke
 were , of of often he and was deepest he whom , However family feelings his proud for . tremendously he his spoke whom loved whom
 proud family , feelings whom , were spoke whom loved deepest he he his of of whom for his often tremendously he However was . and
 was his he tremendously deepest he . he whom often were of loved feelings proud and whom , of , for whom family spoke his However
 and feelings he However whom . for proud often whom were was tremendously , family whom deepest of loved his of his , spoke he he
 deepest whom . whom for proud his of , often feelings were was tremendously spoke he he whom he loved his of family However , and
 deepest whom he However were family proud , loved , he his often whom was whom of . his and tremendously for of spoke he feelings
The Senate met at 2:00 p.m., the Speaker in the Chair.  
Prayers.  
Pages Exchange Program with House of Commons 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, before I call for Senators' Statements, I should like to introduce the two pages who are with us this week through the exchange program with the House of Commons.  
They are Anne McCulluch of Calgary, Alberta, who is pursuing studies in journalism at Carleton University.  
Kirk Nangreaves of Saint-Hubert, Quebec, is studying at the University of Ottawa Arts Faculty.  
He is majoring in psychology.  
On behalf of all senators and the Senate, I bid you welcome.  
SENATORS' STATEMENTS 
The Senate 
Response to Newspaper Article on Senator's Residency Qualifications 
Hon. Colin Kenny :
Honourable senators, I rise today on behalf of a colleague who cannot be present, Senator Paul Lucier. 
Senator Lucier has sent me a fax which he has asked me to communicate to the chamber. 
For your benefit, he wants me to reply to the comments made about him in the media recently.  
He writes: 
I would like to make some points with respect to this matter: 
The Citizen said: "Paul Lucier said the Senate's legal staff approved his change in residency five years ago when he moved to Vancouver."  
Senator Lucier says: 
 However , his deepest feelings were for his family whom he loved , of he spoke often and of whom he was tremendously proud .
 he of whom of whom feelings his tremendously family whom proud . often , was he and for his loved he spoke deepest were ,
 proud was whom his were and whom deepest he . However whom he family loved often of , he tremendously his spoke of , feelings
 , was for deepest loved family he However of . whom he whom his his and spoke of he whom were often , feelings proud
Hon. Marcel Prud'homme :
 Marcel ' . : homme Hon Prud
 : Prud Hon . Marcel ' homme
 . ' Hon Marcel homme Prud :
 ' Hon . homme : Prud Marcel
 : ' . Marcel homme Hon Prud
 ' Prud Hon : Marcel . homme
 ' homme Hon Marcel . : Prud
 Hon ' Marcel Prud : . homme
 Prud . : Hon Marcel homme '
 Marcel ' homme Prud . : Hon
 Hon homme ' : . Marcel Prud
 ' Hon : . Marcel homme Prud
 Prud Hon . Marcel ' homme :
 . : homme Prud ' Marcel Hon
 Marcel Prud Hon homme : . '
 Prud Hon ' homme : Marcel .
Therefore, ships can be deployed at sea and operationally ready for a mission without a Sea King detachment embarked.  
Forestry 
Demolition of Government Laboratories-Possibility of Restoration of Funding-Government Position 
(Response to question raised by Hon. Mira Spivak on November 20, 1997) 
In response to the federal government's Program Review, the Canadian Forest Service (CFS) underwent strategic restructuring to rationalize its operations and to reduce infrastructure costs in the interest of providing maximum funding to research within the context of a reduced operating budget. 
As a consequence, Petawawa National Forest Institute (PNFI) was identified as one of the several Natural Resources Canada (NRCan) operations to be closed as part of a redefined departmental initiative to refocus our Science and Technology (S&T) programs. 
These programs address issues of national and international significance and service our clients through stronger, more effective partnerships with the provinces, industry and other players in the forest sector. 
All the major programs from PNFI have been transferred to the five current CFS research Centres and accordingly the majority of basic research activities from PNFI are ongoing. 
Claims of expenditure for upgrades prior to decommissioning were in fact for operational maintenance, purchase of equipment and some site enhancements. 
With the closure of the site all research equipment and transportable assets relevant to ongoing program activities have been moved to other CFS research Centres with their respective researcher's programs.  
The final phase of deconstruction has been delayed twice in order to seek alternate tenants for the townsite. 
The site in its current state represents a safety risk both in terms of security and liability and requires significant annual expenditures for heating and infrastructure to simply be maintained.  
Answers to Order Paper Questions Tabled 
Energy-Department of the Environment-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) table the answer to Question No. 13 on the Order Paper-by Senator Kenny.  
Energy-Department of Justice-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) table the answer to Question No. 26 on the Order Paper-by Senator Kenny.  
Energy-Department of Multiculturalism-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) table the answer to Question No. 31 on the Order Paper-by Senator Kenny.  
Energy-Department of Natural Resources-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
 Hon . Marcel ' homme :
 Hon . Marcel Prud : '
 : Prud homme . Marcel '
 ' Hon . Prud Marcel homme
Honourable senators, I think that all French Canadians in Quebec know that I have lost a good friend. 
 in Canadians senators French know Quebec think I that have , all friend that a Honourable I lost good .
 think Honourable Canadians that I senators all know in . I , good French friend lost a that Quebec have
 Quebec all . , that French know a have think I friend Honourable lost that senators in good Canadians I
 lost Honourable Quebec in , senators have that Canadians think good I friend that all know French I a .
 Honourable all good know think French , I lost that in friend senators have a Quebec that I Canadians .
 friend . know that think that Quebec have Honourable in good I lost I senators French , a Canadians all
 Honourable I a good lost . I have Quebec senators friend French Canadians in that know all , think that
 I I know . that a lost , Canadians think Honourable Quebec all French good friend senators that have in
 in I French that Honourable Canadians have that I lost . think senators all friend good a Quebec know ,
 in . Canadians that have all think friend I French lost Quebec that know Honourable , senators good a I
 Canadians that Honourable that think French in know . senators all lost I good a Quebec have friend , I
 Quebec that in that I , friend good a . lost Canadians all senators think French Honourable have know I
 senators Quebec friend a . that lost Canadians know Honourable , French that I good all in have think I
 that think , . I a lost know I in good Quebec French all that have senators Canadians friend Honourable
 in that I think friend Honourable all I know good senators French lost have that . , a Quebec Canadians
 know Quebec friend good Canadians senators . , that French that all have I Honourable think I lost a in
This is now clear and unequivocal.  
Clearly and fairly, the Province of Quebec deems itself bound by the 1982 Constitution. 
On the testimony received and based on my personal review, I concluded that the federal government indeed had the power under the 1982 Constitution, section 43, to accede to Quebec's request.  
That Parliament should or would exercise such power was obviously a much more difficult question. 
We recognize, under our Constitution, the nature of the exclusivity of this aspect of education under the Constitution as a provincial matter. 
This question, in pith and substance, is a matter of provincial education within the powers of the Province of Quebec. 
Then, honourable senators, came the more complicated problem alluded to by Senators Wood, Pitfield, Bolduc, Lavoie-Roux and Kirby and Lynch-Staunton, namely, how to determine whether or not, as defenders of the Constitution, we in the Senate could satisfy ourselves that there was a majority of the so-called "minorities" affected by any proposed diminution of their rights or privileges. 
All senators agree that one of our paramount duties in the Senate is to safeguard the Constitution and the rights of the minorities under that Constitution.  
I shall now turn to the essence of section 93, which is called by some commentators, a "Pocket Bill of Rights." 
That is a misnomer.  
In essence, section 93 is a series of privileges rather than full rights. 
Clearly, this is not the case here. 
Section 93 has yet another substantial problem which further diminished and minimized one's ability to define the subsections as containing full rights. 
On its face, these privileges, or limited rights, pertain only to the geography of the city of Montreal and Quebec City at the date of Confederation and beyond, into the province, to the privileges or rights of dissentient Roman Catholic and Protestant denominational school boards.  
Therefore, it is so difficult for me to understand how the subsections of 93 can be considered full rights. 
They could be considered privileges for geographically defined and certain narrowly cast denominational groups.  
Notwithstanding this difficulty, I still considered we had a responsibility to examine whether these groups, said to be affected by these privileges or narrow rights or attenuated rights, agreed with their substitution - not their diminishment or removal - for the architecture of denominational access now afforded under the provisions of Quebec educational laws. 
I say "substitution" because, while the constitutional provisions were being attenuated, denominational rights had previously been incorporated in the Quebec Education Bill 109 and its predecessors leading to that bill. 
There is a clear, overwhelming consensus for citizens in the province of Quebec to maintain a form, some form, of denominational teaching within their school system architecture.  
It is equally clear that there was an overwhelming consensus with few dissents throughout every segment of Quebec for renovating the Quebec school system into two linguistic streams, two linguistic boards, English and French. 
 Honourable , I think that all French Canadians in Quebec know that I have lost a good friend .
 that I think , have . Quebec French a know I that friend senators lost in Honourable good Canadians
 have senators friend all Honourable Quebec that , French good know in think lost that a I I .
 know French think Honourable senators Canadians , good lost I that . a I that friend have in all
Unfortunately, he died when I was on a tour of several Middle Eastern countries. 
 was I tour Eastern Middle . he Unfortunately of a on died several when countries ,
 countries I . he Unfortunately when , tour a was of Eastern Middle died on several
 when was on Middle he Unfortunately . I , Eastern several of countries a tour died
 countries Unfortunately , of . died when Eastern Middle several was tour on I a he
 . tour died on of he a Unfortunately Eastern , when several I Middle countries was
 , Middle of was several . tour when countries Unfortunately died I Eastern on he a
 Eastern a was on I Middle countries several . of when tour he , died Unfortunately
 Eastern Middle , countries of was tour a I Unfortunately when . he died several on
 I . Unfortunately , tour Eastern he on several of when Middle was died a countries
 countries Eastern tour he a on died of Unfortunately , I . was when Middle several
 Unfortunately Eastern a was when on several countries Middle of , he I . tour died
 of countries Eastern tour Unfortunately died on when Middle several was he a . I ,
 was Middle several tour I a countries Eastern Unfortunately , died he of . on when
 I , of countries when Eastern several Unfortunately was on a tour died he . Middle
 of Unfortunately was when countries he several Eastern died on tour I Middle a , .
 died of Middle he , I tour several Eastern when was on . a countries Unfortunately
Senator Carstairs :
There is agreement that we will not see the clock, Your Honour.  
Senator Grafstein :
It is not clear to me whether these witnesses represented the entire spectrum of the groups for whom they spoke. 
Having said that, their rights are of concern.  
However, it is clear that denominational teaching will continue inside the province of Quebec by Quebec law.  
It is difficult to see how their accessibility to denominational teaching in the public school system will be abrogated in the short run. 
Obviously, it is no small solace, unlike the case for many years in the province of Ontario, that minority denominational rights, religious education, was achieved, in part, through public funding in the province of Quebec. In other words, as Senator Lavoie-Roux pointed out, in the province of Ontario there is and was no public funding of other religious or denominational schools, unlike Ontario. 
I want to make specific reference to this point because I have some personal experience in this regard. 
Access to public funding in Quebec for denominational education remains available in Quebec. 
I find it hard to believe how the Province of Quebec in the future, even if the notwithstanding clauses are removed, would not continue to fund denominational training. 
Whether it is through a charter school, a public school system, or through a publicly funded private school system, denominational training to all groups, in my view, will continue in the province of Quebec for the foreseeable future.  
Since we are projecting the future, that is my prediction for the future.  
I wish to mention yet another aspect of the testimony referred to in the Reform Party opinion which is appended to the report.  
At the last minute, after all the testimony was taken, the Reform members of the committee introduced a long petition containing thousands of names objecting to the federal resolution. 
Every opportunity was presented for these voices to be heard during the course of the hearings. 
We did not deny them an opportunity to be heard. 
On the other hand, we were not given an opportunity by the Reform Party to cross-examine those petitioners or to decide what weight, if any, we should give to their petition.  
I concluded, honourable senators, that the overwhelming evidence was that the majority of the minorities affected by these rights and privilege were in favour of the amendments.  
The Roman Catholic Archbishops of Quebec and the Anglican Archbishop have letters on record in which they clearly indicate they did not oppose the amendment.  
 , he died when I was on a tour of several Middle Eastern countries .
 countries on , Middle died was of several he tour Unfortunately a . I Eastern
 was died . of on several tour countries , he a I when Middle Eastern
 tour when Middle died Unfortunately several he a on was of Eastern . , I
I was therefore unable to attend the funeral myself, although my family was represented at the ceremony and I did express my sympathy by telephone.  
 was family therefore represented I telephone the funeral by my unable ceremony and I attend express did my to , . although at was myself the sympathy
 family unable at ceremony telephone represented attend . and was express to I funeral myself did sympathy was my my the I the by therefore , although
 the my family by and the telephone unable , I ceremony . to I therefore sympathy at was although funeral myself did my attend express was represented
 telephone , did . funeral to my ceremony at was unable I my attend represented and therefore I sympathy was although the the express by family myself
 myself , ceremony express family I my the represented although by my unable at I sympathy and funeral telephone was . attend the was to therefore did
 attend was did the represented myself I my therefore although unable to I was funeral and family telephone . at , sympathy my ceremony by express the
 was the and did , although family my represented myself funeral at to I . the ceremony by therefore attend my telephone sympathy was I express unable
 was I represented unable was therefore myself at the express the and by attend did , my family although sympathy I to . ceremony my telephone funeral
 was myself my the , ceremony the express although was attend and funeral unable did . telephone I to sympathy therefore represented family by I at my
 funeral I family telephone I . to the sympathy although therefore my express attend was and ceremony the , my by myself was at represented unable did
 did was I by family funeral I sympathy represented therefore telephone although my . ceremony my at , the was myself and the to attend unable express
 to the my did attend telephone funeral represented sympathy my and was ceremony the therefore unable was by family I although . express I myself at ,
 express ceremony although was by represented , I my attend family was the funeral unable I therefore . and to at telephone myself sympathy did my the
 ceremony represented and telephone family therefore express unable was . sympathy myself was the my the funeral , attend to although my I I at by did
 I although ceremony telephone my myself funeral did family attend to I the express . unable was by , my was represented sympathy the therefore and at
 my telephone therefore at sympathy ceremony the unable . funeral did I to although and was express , myself represented the my I attend by family was
At times, it appears the Supreme Court of Canada considers that the Constitution consists only of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 
Despite all the evidence - the stolen truck, the blood on the accused - the judges were only interested in one thing, and that was the arrest warrant. 
There was no warrant because the police acted on the spot when they had the accused, and I think they acted quite properly.  
Honourable senators, the Supreme Court ignored the rights of Mr. Boyle. 
Section 7 of the Charter indicates that Mr. Boyle had the right to life, privacy and security of the person, and those rights were not to be taken from him except by and in accordance with the principles of fundamental justice.  
I think the justices of the Supreme Court of Canada should be sent a message reminding them that the victim also had rights under the Charter.  
In all fairness, honourable senators, I must say that three of the justices dissented with the majority decision. 
They felt the police action had no bearing or outcome on the decision. 
The chief justice came down the middle and quoted the decision made by former chief justice Brian Dickson, which I understand finds that, if the subject is not spelled out in the Constitution, it is implied as being there. 
However, there again, that is merely my interpretation.  
I emphasize again that Mr. Boyle had the right to his life. 
He had the right to have a vehicle and operate it, and he had the right to have money in his possession. 
All those were taken away from him, and all the Supreme Court of Canada could think of was that piece of paper called a "warrant" and to criticize the police for not having such a document.  
I wanted to suggest that perhaps criminals should apply for a warrant before they commit murder, but I do not want to pursue that because I am afraid that some Charter judge will give them a warrant or a licence to do so. 
Fifteen years ago, I would have been shocked at criticism of a decision rendered by the Supreme Court; but, today that is commonplace. 
When a major decision comes down from the Supreme Court, the media is there to interview people who wish to comment, mostly negatively, on the decision. 
As I stated, we would not have seen a headline like that 15 years ago.  
That is their function, and Parliament has referred it to them. 
However, the enactment of laws remains the function of Parliament. 
It is not the function of the Supreme Court of Canada or any other court to make laws.  
 I was unable to attend the funeral myself , although my family was represented at the ceremony and I did express my sympathy by telephone .
 myself telephone at and . funeral although express family did was therefore by represented unable I my my ceremony to was I the sympathy the attend
 funeral sympathy was did the , I to myself by was my and I unable . ceremony telephone express attend represented although therefore the at family
 to my did was ceremony although my I , I family the attend telephone was myself therefore express by sympathy unable the represented funeral . at
I must tell you that I did not know Petro Rizzuto in the seventies. 
 you must I I in Petro tell did the Rizzuto not that seventies know .
 Rizzuto the in . you did Petro I I must seventies that know tell not
 that I know not the you in Rizzuto tell did I seventies must . Petro
 know must that in Petro I Rizzuto . I the seventies tell you did not
 seventies did that not . the in must Petro I you I tell know Rizzuto
 Rizzuto I in . did Petro not you the know tell I seventies that must
 not seventies tell . must Petro you that the did I Rizzuto I know in
 seventies not the . Rizzuto did I in I must tell Petro you that know
 Rizzuto you not the did seventies in must Petro know I I . tell that
 you the Rizzuto in know not must seventies Petro . I I tell did that
 I . did that you Rizzuto I seventies not Petro must know in the tell
 Rizzuto the did must . I not in that you I know Petro seventies tell
 I . not tell Petro in you Rizzuto must did know the I seventies that
 that know in Petro must . did seventies I I the Rizzuto not you tell
 the . did must seventies know in not that you I Rizzuto tell I Petro
 the tell I Petro must that know you not . Rizzuto did I seventies in
Changes to Canada Pension Plan-Investment Board Not Subject to Access to Information Act-Government Position 
(Response to question raised by Donald H. Oliver on November 19, 1997) 
Applying the Access to Information Act to the CPP Investment Board would be inappropriate.  
The Board's mandate is to invest CPP funds at arm's length from governments in the best interest of plan members. 
As an investment institution, much of its day-to-day activities will be commercially sensitive and would be exempt under ATI in any event.  
While ATI does not apply to the CPP Investment Board, by legislation and regulations the Board's operations will be very transparent and it will be subject to close public scrutiny.  
For example, the Board will be required to: 
- make public its investment policies, code of conduct, corporate governance practices, proxy voting guidelines, and by-laws 
- disclose the compensation of the five most highly compensated officers of the Board 
- prepare quarterly financial statements that will be sent to federal and provincial Finance Ministers, and an annual report that will be tabled in Parliament 
- hold regular public meetings in each participating province to allow for public discussion and input 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
Commemoration of Fiftieth Anniversary-Plans of Government 
(Response to question raised by Hon. Noël A. Kinsella on October 23, 1997) 
The 50th Anniversary provides Canadians an opportunity to reflect on the importance of human rights in the life of the country, as they are a fundamental unifying value and an important part of our legacy to future generations.  
The objectives of the commemoration are to promote respect for human rights and responsibilities; mark Canada's national and international progress in implementing human rights standards; develop innovative and responsive approaches to emerging human rights issues; and, to link values highly esteemed by Canadians - values such as respect for the rule of law, dignity of the person, fairness, equitable treatment and democratic participation - to a broader government agenda related to social cohesion and social justice.  
Activities planned around December 10, 1997 for the launch of the 50th Anniversary commemorative year of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) 
National Defence 
Lack of Helicopter for Number of Navy Frigates-Government Position 
(Response to question raised by Hon. J. Michael Forrestall on November 20, 1997) 
 I must tell you that I did not know Petro Rizzuto in seventies .
 must seventies did Petro know I the you . tell in that not Rizzuto
 in Petro know I you I must that did Rizzuto the seventies tell not
 in Rizzuto I that the I not . did know seventies tell you must
It was monseigneur André-Marie Cimichella who mentioned him to me. 
 mentioned Cimichella who him to - me . monseigneur It Marie was André
 André It monseigneur Cimichella to Marie - . me him was who mentioned
 who mentioned André monseigneur me to Marie . him Cimichella - It was
 André . me to Marie - him who monseigneur Cimichella mentioned It was
 - who me Cimichella mentioned to André It monseigneur him . Marie was
 . Marie was Cimichella mentioned him André me who monseigneur - to It
 It . Marie to monseigneur mentioned me who - was Cimichella him André
 me monseigneur him Cimichella mentioned was André to who Marie - It .
 me Cimichella to It who monseigneur Marie - was him mentioned André .
 me was him André - to . Cimichella Marie monseigneur who It mentioned
 mentioned Cimichella to - André who It him . Marie was me monseigneur
 who Cimichella me was mentioned - André monseigneur to Marie It . him
 him . to It Cimichella Marie mentioned who André monseigneur was me -
 to . mentioned who was It André me Cimichella Marie him monseigneur -
 him - monseigneur was Cimichella It mentioned me to Marie André . who
 him monseigneur Marie - It who me mentioned to Cimichella André was .
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Target Year for Implementation of Government Position taken at Kyoto-Government Position 
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Informetrica Study on Meeting Targets-Government Position 
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Concept of Differing Targets-Government Position 
National Unity 
Recent Remarks of Prime Minister-Possible Conditions of Secession of Quebec-Government Position 
Immigration 
Tracking and Detention of Unsuccessful Refugee Claimants-Government Position 
Detention Facilities for Refugee Claimants-Request for Particulars 
Fisheries and Oceans 
Negotiations on Multilateral Agreement on Investment-Continuation of Limit on Foreign Ownership of Commercial Licences-Government Position 
National Defence 
Search and Rescue Helicopter Replacement Program-Possible Cabinet Discussion on Awarding Contract for Helicopter Purchase-Government Position 
Search and Rescue Helicopter Replacement Program-State of Sea King Helicopter Fleet-Government Position 
Federal-Provincial Relations 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Atlantic Provinces Equal to Increase in Social Transfers-Government Position 
Delayed Answers to Oral Questions 
Human Resources Development 
Changes to Canada Pension Plan-Accountability and Transparency of Investment Board-Undertaking to Publish Quarterly Financial Statements-Government Position 
Changes to Canada Pension Plan-Investment Board Not Subject to Access to Information Act-Government Position 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
 It was monseigneur André - Marie Cimichella mentioned him to me .
 André . It monseigneur him me Cimichella mentioned - was to Marie
 Cimichella was me - It mentioned . who André him to Marie
 to monseigneur mentioned It Marie Cimichella - him was who . André
He told me that he was a hard-working family man and that he would be a great help if he were to agree to serve in the Senate. 
 He were that great - help . agree he in Senate and that man he the was me working to family a a would serve hard if to told be he
 Senate he working hard agree was if that that were to told would serve me a help he a to - be family great he He and the man in .
 if hard to that serve would he were be to family Senate help me the working a a agree that told and in . he - was great he He man
 help be was Senate . - a working family a me to were man would the in hard he and that He agree that if to he serve he told great
 he help serve he be he would that to . was man family Senate the a if great that and - to He working were in agree hard me told a
 help man - He that a told were he . and me be he a to the Senate agree would working in that if to was family serve great he hard
 that Senate a - working would He he were great hard . to told help and agree was in the he me serve he to that if be man family a
 help me he a if . told He that be was the serve great were that agree and he man working a family to in - would he to Senate hard
 that working a was be to that and man would he family he if were me in to serve He hard a he the told great . agree - help Senate
 that that if told family to be - Senate hard serve me and were to man he the was he he in agree help working would He a a great .
 to agree and me was help if were he man working told family great He Senate that hard - be . the to serve would a he a in that he
 that He great serve were to that and me a the hard working to help in agree be would if family . a he told he he was Senate man -
 were to great help the be Senate in would He he to hard told he and man he - a if serve family a . that me working was agree that
 he . Senate hard family would was agree he help great me were and He that be serve to a a that told - if the working to in he man
 serve working Senate he he to . if would - the a hard he told family me help that a He to were be and man in was that great agree
 that . serve to working would he great was - agree that hard in told help be man He Senate me the a he if he and to were family a
The cause, they say, was social behaviour. 
That is what caused the end of this pension plan. 
It is one other social plan gone astray. 
The good old days are gone.  
We have another problem. 
People live longer. 
Again, science has interfered with a social plan. 
Retiring at age 65, dropping dead three to six years later, depending on your gender, was good for governments. 
At its inception in 1965 - payments started on January 1, 1967 - in order to be eligible for CPP benefits, you had to be 68, and 68 was about the same year that the average male died. 
It was the perfect pension plan:
Pay all your lives, and then die just as the first cheque is put into the mail. 
If there was a postal strike, the government had the benefit of both worlds - the pensioner was dead and the cheque was in the mail.  
From the beginning, the CPP was simple, but it was misnamed. 
It was misnamed because it is also a life insurance program. 
However, it is a silly program when it is part of a pension plan.  
Instead of cancelling the benefit, there is an argument made as to whether it should be means tested when cancelled or not. 
That is an area where we can save a lot of money because, as people are dying today, cheques are going out in the mail, at $3,500 a shot. 
Yet we do not have enough money to pay proper pensions when people are alive.  
It is also a disability program. 
There is nothing wrong with having a disability program, but it is part of the Canada Pension Plan now. 
 He told me that he was a hard - working family and that he would be a great help if he were to agree to serve in the Senate .
 serve help would agree me he to He a be hard family the - and working if he man in to he great a that Senate was that . were
 to help Senate if told were was that . man be hard and agree me that he working to serve would a he a - family in he the He
 help a great working family to man would told He if a me he that the were in and he be to that - agree was hard Senate serve he
This goes back many years to when Mr. Trudeau was Prime Minister. 
 was Mr goes Trudeau many when years Minister . This Prime . back to
 goes This to . Minister Trudeau . when many Mr was years back Prime
 Prime was Mr goes to Trudeau many Minister . years . This back when
 back many . This . goes Mr Trudeau was to Prime years Minister when
 . . This Trudeau to goes Prime Minister years Mr was back when many
 This when Trudeau many back . . to Prime was years goes Mr Minister
 was back This years Mr . to . many Prime when Minister goes Trudeau
 This back Minister was Trudeau goes to . when many . years Mr Prime
 Trudeau Mr when to . back Minister . many Prime years was goes This
 . Mr This back was goes when years Trudeau many Minister Prime . to
 Prime goes was Mr . years Minister This Trudeau back to . when many
 Mr when to Prime goes This back was . . Trudeau many years Minister
 to This back Trudeau Mr . Prime . years many when goes Minister was
 Mr goes . to Minister Prime was . This many when Trudeau back years
 Prime Mr to years goes when This Minister was . many back Trudeau .
 . to was back Mr Trudeau . years goes when Minister Prime many This
Honourable senators, the minister who is the sponsor of the resolution has already appeared before the joint committee. 
He came at the beginning and at the end of the hearings, and my honourable colleague was there to ask him questions on the issues that were of concern to him.  
If the honourable senator did not get answers to all his questions, that is an entirely different matter. 
On motion of Senator Kinsella, for Senator Simard, debate adjourned.  
Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration 
Sixth Report of Committee Adopted 
The Senate proceeded to consideration of the sixth report of the Standing Committee on Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration (budgets for certain committees), presented in the Senate on December 4, 1997.  
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, I move, on behalf of Senator Rompkey, the adoption of this report.  
Motion agreed to and report adopted.  
Telecommunications Act Teleglobe Canada Reorganization and Divestiture Act 
Bill to Amend-First Reading 
The Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C-17, to amend the Telecommunications Act and the Teleglobe Canada Reorganization and Divestiture Act. 
Bill read first time.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this bill be read the second time?  
On motion of Senator Carstairs, bill placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading on Thursday, December 11, 1997.  
Canada Marine Bill 
First Reading 
The Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C-9, for making the system of Canadian ports competitive, efficient and commercially oriented, providing for the establishing of port authorities and the divesting of certain harbours and ports, for the commercialization of the St. Lawrence Seaway and ferry services and other matters related to maritime trade and transport and amending the Pilotage Act and amending and repealing other Acts as a consequence.  
 This goes back many years to when . Trudeau was Prime Minister .
 . Prime back Minister goes . when years to was Trudeau This many
 back goes years Trudeau was to Mr Prime . . many This Minister
 This years Trudeau . back . goes was Minister many Mr to when
And so it was that Pietro Rizzuto came to be in the Senate.  
 And . the Rizzuto Senate was in so to came that Pietro it be
 so to was . came that it Pietro in be the Senate And Rizzuto
 was Senate Pietro it Rizzuto . And the so came in to that be
 in Rizzuto Senate the And to . Pietro came so that was be it
 it to came Senate And . in so Rizzuto was that the Pietro be
 Senate Rizzuto . it was And the came so that to Pietro be in
 came it that so And Rizzuto to in . be the Senate Pietro was
 so be Rizzuto that the Senate came to Pietro was And it . in
 be Rizzuto Pietro came was that to so Senate in it the . And
 the . was Rizzuto be came And Pietro in so to it Senate that
 Pietro was And that be it in Rizzuto Senate came so to . the
 came it be Rizzuto so in Pietro the to that Senate And . was
 it to be so that Rizzuto Senate in And Pietro . was the came
 to And Pietro so Rizzuto Senate came in the it . be that was
 the that be so in to it . Rizzuto Pietro came Senate was And
 it came in Senate so Rizzuto was . to And Pietro be that the
Fisheries and Oceans 
Negotiations on Multilateral Agreement on Investment-Continuation of Limit on Foreign Ownership of Commercial Licences-Government Position 
National Defence 
Search and Rescue Helicopter Replacement Program-Possible Cabinet Discussion on Awarding Contract for Helicopter Purchase-Government Position 
Search and Rescue Helicopter Replacement Program-State of Sea King Helicopter Fleet-Government Position 
Federal-Provincial Relations 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Atlantic Provinces Equal to Increase in Social Transfers-Government Position 
Delayed Answers to Oral Questions 
Human Resources Development 
Changes to Canada Pension Plan-Accountability and Transparency of Investment Board-Undertaking to Publish Quarterly Financial Statements-Government Position 
Changes to Canada Pension Plan-Investment Board Not Subject to Access to Information Act-Government Position 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
Commemoration of Fiftieth Anniversary-Plans of Government 
Activities planned around December 10, 1997 for the launch of the 50th Anniversary commemorative year of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) 
National Defence 
Lack of Helicopter for Number of Navy Frigates-Government Position 
Forestry 
Demolition of Government Laboratories-Possibility of Restoration of Funding-Government Position 
Answers to Order Paper Questions Tabled 
Energy-Department of the Environment-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
 And so it was that Pietro came to be in the Senate .
 was so . in to it be Rizzuto the came that Pietro And
 be that in it Pietro to so Rizzuto the And came Senate was
 . the it Rizzuto in was And be that came so to Pietro
There are many things about him that are not widely known. 
 many not widely There . known him things that are about are
 known are widely about There many not things that him . are
 that known are are things widely about not . him many There
 things are widely . that many not There about him are known
 him many not widely that are known about things There are .
 about . him that known widely are not are There things many
 . not are things that There about many widely are known him
 . widely are are not many that known things him There about
 are about not him . known that are There many widely things
 known about him things . are widely are many that There not
 widely . are that things known There many are him about not
 many known . There are him are things widely not that about
 that about many him widely things known not are There . are
 There known widely are are many things not about him that .
 him things . that known are There many about not widely are
 many about are him known . not widely are things that There
Recent Remarks of Prime Minister-Possible Conditions of Secession of Quebec-Government Position 
Hon. Pierre Claude Nolin :
Honourable senators, I would like to return to the matter of the Prime Minister's statement last weekend on Quebec's secession. 
He said in fact last week in Quebec City that he would be prepared to negotiate Quebec's separation, if certain conditions were met.  
I would first like to know what conditions the Prime Minister was referring to?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, the Government of Canada has always said that Quebecers would not be kept within Canada against their will. 
That being said, breaking up a country is not a step that one would take lightly. 
Senator Graham :
The will of Quebecers to leave must be clearly expressed. 
In addition, of course, any process that would lead to secession must respect the law.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
What does the law say on secession?  
Senator Graham :
The government has asked the Supreme Court of Canada to rule on the legality of unilateral secession.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
I had thought that Mr. Dion answered that question himself on the weekend when he said that a UDI would be illegal.  
Senator Nolin :
The Prime Minister has said he was prepared to negotiate. 
The Leader of the Government in the Senate has said the government is not prepared to negotiate.  
 There are many things about him are not widely known .
 about There many . things widely him that not are are
 . are widely things are many about not There that him
 about not are . There widely that known many him are
At the most important moment of our life in Quebec, at the time of the language issue, he served as a wonderful bridge between the French Canadians and those who were ready to fight them to the last Italian in Saint-Léonard, as I always said. 
 served as and most important those , wonderful a the French the - the At , Quebec Saint bridge were to always last issue Léonard said . the , who Canadians moment Italian fight in I at ready he between them as our life of of language time in to the
 I , a At , of Saint language served Léonard were - the ready moment at most issue life who bridge , always to the Quebec the wonderful time as in in of he French important and Canadians them . said fight between the those to the as our Italian last
 in Italian in always , the were most as our language bridge those issue At them of of last ready the served a wonderful , life to to - the important said , moment time Canadians Léonard Saint fight the French Quebec at . he between the as who and I
 language French said to a Canadians most in . moment our important as bridge he Saint At time served fight between in , - of of Léonard the wonderful , issue the as were to them life ready always the last I those and at Italian , who the Quebec the
 , of were - important them to bridge those language as , Italian fight Léonard said Canadians , a he time always at the . the in French last life I who issue served most At the in wonderful Saint the our ready Quebec of to moment and as the between
 Saint who as last , bridge , the between in at served to Léonard them moment the to in Canadians said ready important I our At language fight the he , most - the as and of . a always issue time those the Italian of French wonderful Quebec were life
 Léonard of moment our he the bridge in were as At always a Italian to important French , and them served in of at the to time language the life said issue fight , those , last between I - wonderful who Quebec ready the Canadians most . Saint the as
 always wonderful served time and the Saint he most to our at important who them Léonard the the , . French as were in in I as fight life the Italian moment issue the Canadians - At ready between to those of language a last Quebec of said , bridge ,
 language and , in Quebec fight , he those the issue of in last important , who - always at Italian as a French to the the time Canadians most the served said were Léonard them I . ready of Saint as our to moment between wonderful At life bridge the
 said to most Léonard French the Quebec of wonderful Italian who language , - . in in the of ready were always fight bridge Canadians the those , issue between and a I he , as moment served them to time at the last At our as the life Saint important
 moment between ready Léonard fight Italian them . served as were as he and , to French in - bridge , Canadians issue to last I life important of in always at those Saint the time of wonderful most the the said the a the our At language Quebec , who
 , life Quebec ready were said as Canadians last those at , language our bridge moment the the French the who always important the most a I time he wonderful as them to in Italian Saint - the and , to fight of in served of . At Léonard issue between
 - and , Canadians , in said to the our Italian the at last as a he I of moment bridge in the fight who always Saint wonderful At as to life Quebec Léonard language French those the most were between issue them , time important served of ready . the
 always , time wonderful the at the fight At of moment them . served life ready who were as those , Italian said bridge French the he the to last to issue our as I - Quebec the Canadians between in language of most Saint a Léonard , in and important
 I - At , important last to our Italian them moment French of in the bridge , who the said served the Quebec . most at to those fight a time as , and Léonard language as were the of always the he life wonderful Canadians issue between ready Saint in
 bridge ready served wonderful Canadians to , At important fight of last moment life - in Italian . who as of the said in our Léonard to the as Saint the at language were Quebec he always the time the , , between and I those a issue them French most
What happened in the last recession was a $2 billion surplus in the Employment Insurance Account turned into a $6 billion deficit in two years, and it was necessary to increase premiums by 30% at what was already a difficult time for job creation. 
Consequently, the government believes that it is wise to establish a reserve in the Employment Insurance Account.  
I am assuming that since you have given me this response, that was indeed the strategy on the part of the government.  
I then went on to say: 
If I may, I will quote from The Financial Post of today, November 26, a 1997. 
An editorial entitled "EI surplus is a deficit-reduction tax" states clearly that the EI will result: 
...in an accumulated surplus suspected to top a scandalous $19 billion by the end of 1998. 
If you need $8 billion to look after a recession, using the last recession as the example, what kind of recession are you planning on?  
That is to say, what kind of recession are they planning on in the future with a reserve of $18 billion?  
Provincial finance ministers met in Ottawa. 
I think last night they had dinner with Finance Minister Paul Martin. 
In an article in The Globe and Mail yesterday, it was stated: 
With Ontario's Ernie Eves and B.C.'s Andrew Petter leading the charge, the provincial ministers have made it clear that they consider Mr. Martin's recent $1.4 billion cut to unemployment insurance premiums insufficient...  
The premiers have insisted that they have some input into Ottawa's budget-making and how it allocates the surplus among new spending, tax cuts and debt repayment.  
In a telephone interview on Friday, Mr. Petter said the NDP government in British Columbia wants Ottawa to offset a dramatic increase in Canada Pension Plan premiums with reductions in UI premiums.  
"We're worried about the impact that Canada Pension Plan increases will have in terms of the burden they will impose on business and workers, and the potential they have to reduce job creation by a huge amount if they go ahead without some kind of offsetting relief," Mr. Petter said.  
Ontario's Conservative government is also demanding large cuts to UI premiums, Mr. Eves said in an interview...  
Alberta Treasurer Stockwell Day also indicated last week that he'll be pushing Mr. Martin for tax cuts.  
I predict today that, although this government has managed to get away with things for which our government would have been slaughtered, I think this bill, coupled with what is coming down the track and the changes in OAS and GIS, coupled with the arrogance of the stance taken at Kyoto, this is the kind of arrogance that, inevitably, will be the downfall of this government. 
I predict that that is about to happen.  
 At the most important moment of our life in Quebec , at the time of the language issue , he served as a wonderful bridge between the French Canadians and those who were ready to fight them to the last Italian in - Léonard , as I always said .
 issue always Italian he important at the fight last time moment as of . those of At bridge were to life served as language between , said ready a I Léonard to Quebec in French in the and the , Saint them wonderful Canadians our , who most the -
 Italian a our as those the served between French the , in he of bridge in and them language Canadians I At most Saint the last always , Quebec the were wonderful important ready who time of issue , as said . the life to Léonard to at fight -
 in who the were served those Saint fight the time them at most wonderful between important as the last moment the a At to Canadians in Italian said life , , he , ready the I of Léonard Quebec always issue . and - language French of to as our
Pietro Rizzuto stepped in because he understood what it was to be a French Canadian in Quebec. 
 in to because Quebec understood he was in Canadian French Pietro be it stepped what . a Rizzuto
 in . stepped a because to it Rizzuto Quebec Pietro understood was be in French Canadian he what
 French . what was a stepped in Rizzuto because be he Canadian to Pietro it understood Quebec in
 it was he . to what be in stepped Quebec understood Rizzuto because a Canadian French Pietro in
 in understood stepped French Rizzuto to Pietro Quebec be a he Canadian what . it in was because
 Quebec it because Canadian he to Rizzuto in what be French understood was in stepped Pietro a .
 Quebec a was in to Rizzuto in . he Pietro Canadian stepped understood be French it what because
 in Pietro because Canadian in what Quebec he French Rizzuto a was to be stepped . understood it
 Rizzuto Pietro . Quebec to understood was what in he because it a be Canadian in stepped French
 Canadian what in stepped to was understood in he Quebec Rizzuto French . a be because Pietro it
 French it be . Quebec in Canadian in what stepped because Rizzuto was a Pietro understood to he
 . Canadian because Quebec what Rizzuto was French understood in a it Pietro in to be stepped he
 in stepped was it Rizzuto to because Pietro a French be he Quebec what Canadian . understood in
 Quebec Rizzuto because a was Pietro be it understood . in to French what stepped in Canadian he
 French because in be it understood . in stepped Quebec was Rizzuto what Canadian Pietro a to he
 stepped what Quebec to in understood it be . Rizzuto because was he Canadian a French in Pietro
He was one of the top bureaucrats and one of the top men in the Quebec government at one time. 
He brings that experience to this forum.  
I would prefer to ask this question of the government side, but no one will speak further on it. 
Therefore, I will ask Senator Bolduc.  
This involves a question that I asked Senator Kirby yesterday. 
It is a question of accountability. 
In theory, it is possible that this fund will become larger than the entire budget of the federal government in the years to come. 
Yet we are placing it in the hands of 12 people.  
Does the Honourable Senator Bolduc concur, as Senator Kirby did, that there should be some scrutiny by Senate and House of Commons committees whereby these 12 people who will be sitting on this board will be under a certain amount of scrutiny before they are placed in this lofty, powerful, very responsible position?  
Senator Bolduc :
Honourable senators, that is a very good question. 
There is one thing in the bill that is very acceptable. 
The Auditor General will be able to look at the management of the Investment Board.  
As a result, there will be some accountability in the form of an audit. 
According to Mr. Massé's report, there are 85 to 90 different government organizations. 
This is all very interesting, but none of them will have as much money as the one we are talking about. 
We are talking about an annual amount on the order of 15 per cent to 20 per cent of Canada's gross national product. 
It is an enormous amount. 
I therefore think there has to be some sort of accountability, and one of the ways to achieve that is for parliamentarians to be involved in drafting the Auditor General's report; in my view, there should be an amendment along these lines, to guarantee that that is the case.  
Hon. Jerahmiel S. Grafstein :
 Pietro Rizzuto stepped in because he understood what it to be a French Canadian in Quebec .
 because what Canadian understood he in French be stepped to . in was Pietro it a Rizzuto
 understood was Quebec a Canadian he in because French it stepped be Pietro what in Rizzuto .
 Rizzuto Pietro be what . French it to stepped Quebec because understood was he in Canadian in
He understood the language issue and the school issue.  
 understood school and issue language the the . issue He
 the language and issue issue school the . He understood
 understood the He the . issue school and language issue
 issue He understood school and the language . issue the
 and understood the . language school issue He issue the
 issue issue school language and understood the the He .
 the the issue He issue and school . language understood
 . understood and issue school the issue the He language
 understood He language . the issue school and issue the
 He language . and understood issue school issue the the
 understood issue school the He and . the issue language
 . He school the language understood issue issue and the
 He issue issue school and understood language . the the
 . the and issue language understood He issue school the
 understood He language . and school issue issue the the
 the the He issue issue school understood . and language
Agreed.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this report be taken into consideration?  
On motion of Senator Gustafson, report placed on the Orders the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate.  
Present State and Future of Forestry 
Report of Agriculture and Forestry Committee Tabled 
Hon. Leonard J. Gustafson :
Honourable senators, I have the honour to table the third report of the Standing Senate Committee on Agriculture and Forestry, with a request that the committee be empowered to incur special expenses pursuant to the Procedural Guidelines for the Financial Operation of Senate Committees .  
I ask that the report be printed as an appendix to the Journals of the Senate of this day.  
( For text of report, see today's Journals of the Senate, Appendix "B", p. 321. 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this report be taken into consideration?  
On motion of Senator Gustafson, report placed on the Orders the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate.  
Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration 
Seventh Report of Committee Presented 
Hon. Bill Rompkey , Chair of the Standing Committee on Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration, presented the following report: 
Tuesday, December 9, 1997 
The Standing Committee on Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration has the honour to present its 
SEVENTH REPORT 
Your Committee notes the attendance record of Senator Thompson and recommends that, effective immediately: 
 understood the language issue and the school issue .
 . understood language issue He issue the school the
 issue the He the issue understood language . and
 and issue . language school understood issue He the
I hope that all those familiar with the language issue - which almost drove a wedge between us and our blood brothers, as I call my Italian friends - will write about this part of Pietro Rizzuto's life.  
 language us this a almost ' all call friends hope those with the Rizzuto I drove issue s will - my . which part , of brothers about Italian - blood Pietro between and life familiar our wedge that write I as
 - my almost call those drove hope s which I Italian brothers us wedge part life will write the familiar between about Rizzuto friends language all , . I blood that this ' our with of a and - Pietro issue as
 Pietro almost Italian I language . with that Rizzuto between of about issue drove the brothers hope friends all my s write us , part as call - blood a ' those wedge which our and familiar life - will this I
 brothers issue will I all , s our almost - us write drove which language hope a ' Italian about . life that my the Rizzuto with call - part familiar this and wedge I those blood friends Pietro of between as
 life Rizzuto I Pietro about issue - between familiar with call wedge that Italian of brothers ' blood drove friends I part us those a as which and this , all s my our write will almost - hope . the language
 call I with those about - language Rizzuto a almost that as Italian issue my this our the part which s between , us blood life brothers and Pietro hope wedge . familiar friends all I - will of ' drove write
 with wedge write that my us Pietro the about drove and between s blood - as this I issue brothers call , those ' friends life our which . - language a part hope of almost Italian all familiar Rizzuto will I
 friends us about the almost and life my with drove language which ' Rizzuto - brothers of Italian s . between will those our this that I , hope I - Pietro familiar blood part as wedge write a all issue call
 this familiar brothers ' friends as will call us about between issue those that I hope the which drove our . my life Pietro wedge write a I s - blood of Italian , - Rizzuto all language with and almost part
 part hope call blood between drove write all us familiar , Rizzuto I which will about that language of friends life with Italian and those - I ' my wedge issue as this our Pietro s . - a brothers almost the
 friends our I with issue us I Rizzuto that almost between . - call those and s life my about write Italian will hope a language - familiar ' which part this drove the all Pietro as of brothers wedge blood ,
 will almost with life all . of familiar which - my this blood friends - ' I between us brothers , part Rizzuto issue hope our the wedge a about and that s call Pietro as drove write those Italian language I
 those - blood between of issue my our us - will Pietro s that as friends , call ' Italian all and about familiar hope I the this almost wedge brothers a . with language write drove Rizzuto which life I part
 about Italian us call drove between part I of issue brothers Rizzuto I write wedge a life , - as that hope almost the blood Pietro our this - my language all with those familiar ' friends which will . s and
 that and write part , all as language Rizzuto call blood this brothers drove . between I my with wedge a our ' which familiar Pietro almost the issue hope I will us friends life of about those Italian - s -
 friends about , s Italian which and - Pietro us language this those drove a - hope call familiar with as our between blood I all wedge life almost issue write my part ' the I that brothers will Rizzuto . of
If that is a question, I would hope my honourable friend is wrong, and that I am correct in saying that it is to be hoped that there will be a decision before the end of this year.  
Senator Forrestall :
Cabinet will meet again, then. 
I am pleased to hear that.  
Search and Rescue Helicopter Replacement Program-State of Sea King Helicopter Fleet-Government Position 
Hon. J. Michael Forrestall :
Where are the other six? 
Are they on ships at sea? 
We have 30 in the inventory.  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, the answer is yes, there are 30 helicopters in the inventory. 
As I indicated yesterday, 24 were cleared, and six remain to be inspected. 
They will be inspected by December 18.  
Of the 24 that were inspected, only two were found to be in need of repair. 
As to precisely where the other six are located, I would need to consult with the appropriate authorities at National Defence. 
I will bring forward an answer for my honourable friend.  
Senator Forrestall :
Was there any criticism from our NATO allies with respect to the grounding of these aircraft? 
My understanding is that these aircraft are at sea, and a number of them are engaged in some training exercises. 
Were we criticized for not being able to live up to our obligations?  
 I hope that all those familiar with the language - which almost drove a wedge between us and our blood brothers , as I call my Italian friends - will write about this part of Pietro Rizzuto ' s life .
 s - friends - almost life issue between wedge drove I all Italian that my blood this which familiar and write will I as Pietro , Rizzuto of part call about with ' us language those hope . brothers a the
 ' friends the brothers life I call , and all wedge part Rizzuto which my Pietro - I as hope language those . us our about issue almost a of this will between that - write s Italian familiar with drove
 this brothers which and call I life friends between Italian language - as , part write the issue will those . - blood I my familiar Rizzuto that ' drove our with hope a wedge all almost of Pietro about us
I am grateful to the senator and his entire family for their continued friendship.  
 grateful am his I for to family and their the friendship continued . senator entire
 friendship I continued their grateful entire his family to am for senator . the and
 family their I am the senator entire continued his to and grateful for . friendship
 for . family senator and friendship his entire grateful am continued to the I their
 grateful family the . senator and to his entire their I friendship for continued am
 . family senator friendship am their to for I continued grateful his and entire the
 senator am continued family the to and friendship grateful entire their . for his I
 family to and his . senator grateful continued entire for their am friendship I the
 his the senator entire continued family am and I grateful . to friendship for their
 and grateful the to senator their continued am . family I his entire for friendship
 family and to am friendship his entire continued grateful their . the I for senator
 grateful . and family am for his senator friendship I their entire continued the to
 am his I the . their for friendship to senator family continued grateful and entire
 for friendship . their his family and senator continued grateful I the to entire am
 continued . family and I his friendship senator the grateful to entire for their am
 I . am friendship continued grateful entire his to for their senator family the and
Energy-Department of the Environment-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Energy-Department of Justice-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Energy-Department of Multiculturalism-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Energy-Department of Natural Resources-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Defence-Status of Clothe the Soldier Project 
Defence-Status of the Armoured Personnel Carrier Replacement Program 
Business of the Senate 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
Second Reading-Debate Continued 
Canada Cooperatives Bill 
First Reading 
Criminal Code 
Interpretation Act 
Bill to Amend-Second Reading-Motions in Amendment-Debate Adjourned to Await Ruling of Speaker 
Motion in Sub-Amendment 
Quebec 
Linguistic School Boards-Amendment to Section 93 of Constitution-Report of Special Joint Committee Adopted 
Quebec 
Linguistic School Boards-Motion to Amend Section 93 of Constitution-Debate Adjourned 
Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration 
 I am grateful to the senator and his family for their continued friendship .
 and the senator continued friendship their for entire to I his am grateful family
 entire am senator his grateful continued for . friendship and family I the to
 their grateful to I the . his friendship family entire continued for and senator
When we travel, we discover many things about our colleagues that we do not see in the Senate or in the province, and this was true when I travelled in Italy with Petro. 
 many discover do true about Senate . in or travelled was the , Petro this and we Italy when with in see not in colleagues travel our province , that When I the things we we
 when this Petro was . see travelled colleagues with I many we that or and province the the , Senate , discover true about When things Italy we not do we in in our travel in
 we in many do we travel was When or Italy this that the and see , colleagues discover when province not I in we our , with . Senate things about the Petro travelled true in
 travel about see not the colleagues true I that was in , , Senate many and we in province in or When Italy we things with we Petro the this do travelled our when discover .
 province see and or was in not about When I colleagues , discover many when travelled we Italy our Petro in . the in we travel , Senate do things true that we the this with
 When we do travel true we . Petro many our the travelled when discover colleagues we , and things Italy see in in or not about province was that Senate this the , I in with
 the or do I colleagues true province When things , the in travel travelled . in that with when many Petro discover our and this we , in Senate see we was Italy not about we
 in the true when , do discover we I in see , about or we and in Petro things that colleagues with When not . the Senate travelled our many travel this province Italy was we
 travel Petro that When when with the and province about Italy colleagues , Senate in this in see do true things we we travelled many the not discover was our in or I . , we
 that I Italy travel not we in we Petro about the our in or and this discover the when was with see travelled , , do in Senate many things we true When colleagues province .
 see colleagues I our province travel in many discover . in Petro in the true When the that , Senate things we was not or do Italy we with this , travelled and we about when
 we Senate . was we that province our in or , see Italy when this we many travel colleagues in I discover in the travelled about When , with the Petro do true not and things
 was many . colleagues we we discover I we the in about When do travel true Petro and this not in that when the Italy see our things Senate in , travelled with or province ,
 . the see our or colleagues that we do with , about discover and , this Senate Italy we province was many we things in when Petro not true in travel the in When travelled I
 we or about the province when When . in colleagues our , Italy we the that things , I in was Petro travel in Senate see we many do not travelled with true discover this and
 Petro we this travel colleagues discover province see in about that in , things many or with when our Senate and the When do the I was in travelled . we not Italy we true ,
On October 1 of this year, Senator Meighen asked a question concerning employment insurance. 
On October 23, I asked a further question, referring to my colleague's earlier question. 
I received a response yesterday to my question, and I wish to read it into the record. 
This concerns employment insurance and the reserve. 
It states: 
A reserve is necessary, since it makes it possible to apply more stable premium rates throughout the economic cycle, thus making it possible to avoid increasing them in a recessionary period. 
In addition, the reserve makes it possible to ensure there are sufficient funds to pay benefits when they are most necessary.  
What happened in the last recession was a $2 billion surplus in the Employment Insurance Account turned into a $6 billion deficit in two years, and it was necessary to increase premiums by 30% at what was already a difficult time for job creation. 
Consequently, the government believes that it is wise to establish a reserve in the Employment Insurance Account.  
I am assuming that since you have given me this response, that was indeed the strategy on the part of the government.  
I then went on to say: 
If I may, I will quote from The Financial Post of today, November 26, a 1997. 
An editorial entitled "EI surplus is a deficit-reduction tax" states clearly that the EI will result: 
...in an accumulated surplus suspected to top a scandalous $19 billion by the end of 1998. 
If you need $8 billion to look after a recession, using the last recession as the example, what kind of recession are you planning on?  
That is to say, what kind of recession are they planning on in the future with a reserve of $18 billion?  
Provincial finance ministers met in Ottawa. 
I think last night they had dinner with Finance Minister Paul Martin. 
In an article in The Globe and Mail yesterday, it was stated: 
With Ontario's Ernie Eves and B.C.'s Andrew Petter leading the charge, the provincial ministers have made it clear that they consider Mr. Martin's recent $1.4 billion cut to unemployment insurance premiums insufficient...  
 When we travel , we discover many things about our colleagues that we do not see in the Senate or in the province , and this true when I travelled in Italy with Petro .
 this that we about or do travelled was colleagues Senate travel the in Italy I see not , , . many in in province true and discover When when we things Petro we our with
 travel Italy the Petro this in with was we see , travelled we , province many in true Senate discover when the . colleagues that not we and our When or in I about do
 many Senate province Petro do the in travelled this we travel . things when we When about Italy I or in with the not that colleagues was in , our and discover , we see
The last trip we made together was when I had the pleasure of introducing him to Mr. Castro in Cuba, at a time when there were opportunities for economic development. 
 time to trip there development a had opportunities were at economic pleasure was made Mr when for . . Castro introducing in when we I Cuba of last him together , The the
 the we . I a Mr development The were made last was there , in for when economic had at pleasure Castro together to . trip introducing of Cuba when him time opportunities
 had Cuba last was . I opportunities pleasure together of the Mr a introducing at when him in time Castro were economic development there The made to . for trip when we ,
 Castro at Mr when when was The opportunities in him , time were to there economic a trip had together for last we I made . of development the introducing pleasure Cuba .
 economic time we a was last introducing were made when the The I for in there pleasure together . development Castro opportunities when had of . him Cuba trip Mr at , to
 in . development of I there together , The had pleasure a was . made last when trip the at for were time Cuba we Mr opportunities Castro to economic him when introducing
 economic a last him at when , Castro introducing there made we for pleasure were to of I had trip together the when Cuba . time Mr The opportunities was in development .
 to The pleasure the there of introducing we economic trip for had together last . made in time Mr was I at were him Cuba Castro development when when a opportunities . ,
 a I for , . was trip Castro time we the together when economic The opportunities made of . were Mr pleasure when introducing in there at had him last to development Cuba
 to Castro was together last economic a pleasure in Mr Cuba development when trip were time at The , for made when I introducing of . him . there had we the opportunities
 were trip the The there Castro I a in development time had Mr we for . made of . opportunities at introducing when , was when economic together pleasure Cuba last to him
 was were , for . time at opportunities a when pleasure in economic Cuba had Castro when to development together last The of . introducing trip made there I him Mr the we
 opportunities we development were The for . together introducing at I a pleasure made Cuba in was there trip when had economic of the Mr Castro , . last time to when him
 introducing we of him Castro a had Mr . there in when , for development at together made The to economic last when pleasure time was opportunities the I . were Cuba trip
 last there . of . The for trip time , Castro at Cuba economic him in the was when to introducing pleasure together we when had a I were Mr development opportunities made
 the introducing development made at a opportunities when Castro were him trip had for , last I to of pleasure was we economic when . Cuba there . The Mr time in together
When citizens debate their children's education, sometimes passion overwhelms reason.  
It was with some trepidation that I entered the thicket of the Quebec school question, coming as I do from the province of Ontario. 
The dense history of the Quebec school question holds lessons for us all.  
Once appointed to the committee, I set about to better understand the tangled roots of history lying beneath this question, to digest as best I could the numerous articles, studies and especially reports commissioned by successive Quebec governments over the last few years ranging from the articulate Parent commission to the Kenniff report to the findings of the Estates General. 
It became evident to me that a deep and thorough consensus had developed for radical reformation, at least among the elites of Quebec. 
Claude Ryan, an old friend of mine and the then Minister of Education, had galvanized that reform process over a decade ago in Quebec. 
It was equally clear to me that the existing school structures were in desperate need of renovation, particularly in light of the overlapping school structures in Quebec and the financial restraints facing all governments.  
Rather than an historic essay, perhaps it would be simpler if I could share with you my thought processes and the evidence I found as a member of the Standing Senate Committee on the Quebec Resolution Requesting Constitutional Change.  
First, a brief word about committees and their work. 
There are, as all senators know, three committee structures in Parliament: the committees of the other place, our Senate committees - both special and standing - and the special joint and standing committees of the Senate and the House of Commons. 
I prefer Senate committees.  
Senate committees are less partisan, more thorough and more careful. 
Joint committees are a compromise, but I am confident that the Senate's practice of care and attention was, for the most part, adopted in the work of the special joint committee on the Quebec school question.  
It is true, as senators have pointed out, that the special joint committee was given a short time-frame to make its recommendations. 
However, committee members were assiduous in assuring all points of view were heard, unlike the Government of Quebec which chose not to have public hearings. 
This made our task doubly difficult.  
As senators, we are unlike any other evidence-gathering body. 
We gather evidence, we serve as our own advisors, seek our own counsel, we become judges, and we become the jury. 
We are the supreme court of the land when it comes to legislation. 
We must view the evidence before committees with care. 
 The last trip we made together was when I had the pleasure of introducing him to Mr . Castro in Cuba at a time when there were opportunities for economic development .
 of had The made economic him Mr a in were opportunities development . when when , to pleasure we for trip time I the was last Castro together Cuba at introducing there
 when in , to opportunities economic made for when at Mr him were trip Castro had The pleasure time introducing was of we development . there . a Cuba the I together
 I Cuba made economic together when the him trip in we was . pleasure at The , time to a opportunities introducing Mr had for development Castro last of . when there
Senator Rizzuto was always on the lookout for anything that could boost the economy of Quebec and of our country. 
 country anything Rizzuto that our of always economy on was and Quebec Senator boost . of for the lookout the could
 of boost could our always Rizzuto on anything economy Senator was lookout country and Quebec the that the for of .
 that economy lookout could the our on always of was for the Senator . Rizzuto anything boost Quebec of and country
 could on Senator Rizzuto for economy anything the boost . the Quebec that always lookout of was and of our country
 country Senator boost of always was for the . anything our could economy and the Rizzuto of on that lookout Quebec
 for always of and the . our country of economy on that Senator anything lookout Quebec could Rizzuto the was boost
 our Quebec that Senator could on anything country the of . Rizzuto of always economy lookout was for and the boost
 of always Senator could country the the anything that for Rizzuto and boost economy on was our . Quebec of lookout
 Rizzuto of boost was . of lookout country economy the and could always Quebec our the that on Senator anything for
 Senator for boost Rizzuto was anything that of and Quebec . economy the the country always lookout could our on of
 the could always was Quebec . lookout economy that the on and our of of Senator country anything boost for Rizzuto
 country the the of boost of for Quebec economy Senator anything was Rizzuto our on always . lookout could and that
 of Quebec always Rizzuto anything and economy of was boost on the country lookout Senator that . could our for the
 the Senator always economy country on Rizzuto that for . of and anything boost the Quebec our could lookout was of
 for was lookout Senator anything . on of always boost the that country economy Quebec Rizzuto and our of the could
 was that of always for boost lookout country anything economy Senator our of . and Rizzuto could the Quebec on the
Honourable senators, I move, on behalf of Senator Rompkey, the adoption of this report.  
Motion agreed to and report adopted.  
Telecommunications Act Teleglobe Canada Reorganization and Divestiture Act 
Bill to Amend-First Reading 
The Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C-17, to amend the Telecommunications Act and the Teleglobe Canada Reorganization and Divestiture Act. 
Bill read first time.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this bill be read the second time?  
On motion of Senator Carstairs, bill placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading on Thursday, December 11, 1997.  
Canada Marine Bill 
First Reading 
The Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C-9, for making the system of Canadian ports competitive, efficient and commercially oriented, providing for the establishing of port authorities and the divesting of certain harbours and ports, for the commercialization of the St. Lawrence Seaway and ferry services and other matters related to maritime trade and transport and amending the Pilotage Act and amending and repealing other Acts as a consequence.  
Bill read first time.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this bill be read the second time?  
On motion of Senator Carstairs, bill placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading on Thursday, December 11, 1997.  
Aboriginal Peoples 
Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples-Committee Authorized to Study Recommendations 
Hon. Charlie Watt , pursuant to notice of December 8, 1997, moved: 
That the Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal Peoples be authorized to examine and report upon the recommendations of the Royal Commission Report on Aboriginal Peoples (Sessional paper 2/35-508.) 
 Senator Rizzuto was always on the lookout for anything that could boost the economy of and of our country .
 Senator was the of country economy of our could for lookout always the and anything Quebec Rizzuto . that on
 that the Quebec and for of of the anything economy always country could boost . Senator on Rizzuto our was
 Senator the of could Quebec for was on of . our lookout anything the that boost Rizzuto country economy always
I learned a lot from him.  
 . from I learned lot him a
 . him from lot I a learned
 him a I lot learned . from
 from learned a lot . him I
 lot a I him from learned .
 from him I . lot a learned
 lot I . him from a learned
 from a him . I lot learned
 from him I . learned lot a
 a him . from learned lot I
 . a learned from lot I him
 learned I a from . him lot
 him learned from . I lot a
 . lot a learned from I him
 him learned lot a . I from
 him a learned from . lot I
That is why the Auditor General is prohibited from examining the fund unless the directors of the fund agree. 
It should not be for the directors to agree or disagree. 
Parliament must insist that the Auditor General report to us on the fund and on its administration. 
However, the Auditor General will report to the directors of the fund on how they manage their affairs. 
That is not acceptable.  
We are talking of $100 billion by the year 2006, and rapid increases thereafter. 
On this record, it will fail.  
It is an anomaly of governments to charge taxes for employment insurance premiums, and then reduce services to accumulate a surplus to pay down a deficit. 
It then writes cheques for something else. 
The government charges taxes for transportation then imposes user fees at airports and tolls on highways for the right to use the airports and highways that we have paid taxes to build and maintain. 
It imposes taxes to create historical sites and national parks and then charge people to get in. 
It charges premiums for pensions but, by the way, cannot pay those pensions, so the government has to charge us more.  
Look through the bill. 
It is simply paying more money for less benefits. 
Anyone can do that. 
Even the Liberals can do that.  
The government is unable to manage the present program so it wants more money to enable it to manage it better. 
We must remember that the author of Bill C-2 is Paul Martin. 
Paul Martin is a real smart guy. 
We remember that he had to stoop to bribing three Atlantic provinces, with other people's money, to fulfil his promises of harmonization. 
 I learned a from him .
 lot from I learned a him
 . a from I him lot
 I learned from him . lot
Hon. Peter Bosa :
 : Hon . Bosa Peter
 Hon : Bosa . Peter
 Peter Hon : . Bosa
 Hon : Bosa Peter .
 Bosa . Peter : Hon
 . Peter Bosa Hon :
 : Bosa . Hon Peter
 Hon Peter : . Bosa
 Peter . Bosa Hon :
 Hon : . Peter Bosa
 . Bosa Peter Hon :
 : Peter Hon . Bosa
 Peter . Bosa : Hon
 Bosa Peter : Hon .
 . Hon : Peter Bosa
 Hon : . Peter Bosa
They are off in left field somewhere, although I do not think they would want to be described that way.  
Now they want to create a super-RRSP, which does not make any sense because, not only is it at odds with what they said in committee and what they said in the election campaign, it does not fit into their tax plan. 
Remember, they have a tax plan with a flat tax. 
With the flat tax, you reduce the amount of exemptions. 
We are not getting any ideas from them.  
Now I will turn to the Liberals.  
Senator Gigantès :
Be careful.  
Senator Tkachuk :
Since taking office, they have taken $300 million in new taxes from senior citizens by income-testing the age credit. 
They want Canadians to mature their RRSPs by the year they turn 69 rather than the previous age limit of 71. 
However, seniors do not know about it, and this will be another huge tax grab - Merry Christmas, Canada - by the Liberal Government and Paul Martin. 
Twice they have killed plans to increase the RRSP contribution limits so that people could put money away for their future given that the government will not provide for them.  
The Canadian Association of Retired Persons says that as many as 80,000 Canadians may fail to convert their RRSPs on time. 
Where are the big advertising programs of the Government of Canada which they mount when they really want to advertise something? 
This is a government program they do not want to advertise. 
They want it to slip in, just like this bill, so that people will not know and will not make the proper financial decisions, but instead will be exposed to a huge tax load for the year 1997. 
That is what Paul Martin wants, so that in February he can brag in his budget speech about how he has cleaned up the deficit - on the backs of the unemployed, on the backs of senior citizens, and on the backs of young people who will be paying the $400 million to the new pension plan.  
Senator Gigantès :
That is because over nine years you did nothing to address the deficit.  
 Hon . Peter :
 Hon : Bosa Peter
 Hon . Bosa :
 . Hon Peter Bosa
Honourable senators, I should like to associate myself with those senators who preceded me in paying tribute to Senator Rizzuto.  
 , senators tribute myself should to preceded I paying Senator like Rizzuto senators . to me in Honourable who associate those with
 Honourable Senator preceded should . me Rizzuto like to senators those myself paying I in tribute , senators who with to associate
 preceded those Honourable like to tribute with me . in , should paying Rizzuto senators to myself Senator senators who associate I
 paying to Rizzuto who with like associate I those senators Honourable Senator . senators me preceded tribute should , to in myself
 in . Rizzuto associate paying I to Senator myself senators who to me Honourable like , preceded tribute those senators with should
 to me Rizzuto tribute in should myself preceded , who with to associate Senator those Honourable . senators I senators like paying
 should me senators myself I Senator tribute . who paying Rizzuto Honourable to with preceded like senators in to those , associate
 tribute with Senator paying Honourable associate preceded to who should , . senators I in me those like Rizzuto senators to myself
 with Rizzuto Senator me associate tribute senators should like myself paying in who I , Honourable to those preceded to . senators
 those senators to . I like myself with senators , in Honourable Rizzuto preceded to tribute should paying associate Senator who me
 like with myself I in senators associate who Rizzuto should those Honourable senators , paying me preceded tribute to to . Senator
 to I . Rizzuto myself those tribute paying , who should senators Senator Honourable like senators associate to in me with preceded
 paying in tribute I Rizzuto should associate . me Honourable to Senator those senators who myself preceded with , like senators to
 who Senator I preceded , Rizzuto associate like with Honourable those senators senators in to . paying myself should me to tribute
 , to myself . Senator to in with those associate who paying preceded senators I like tribute should Honourable Rizzuto senators me
 me those Honourable senators like with paying to Rizzuto I preceded myself tribute associate . to in Senator senators who should ,
Where are the other six? 
Are they on ships at sea? 
We have 30 in the inventory.  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, the answer is yes, there are 30 helicopters in the inventory. 
As I indicated yesterday, 24 were cleared, and six remain to be inspected. 
They will be inspected by December 18.  
Of the 24 that were inspected, only two were found to be in need of repair. 
As to precisely where the other six are located, I would need to consult with the appropriate authorities at National Defence. 
I will bring forward an answer for my honourable friend.  
Senator Forrestall :
Was there any criticism from our NATO allies with respect to the grounding of these aircraft? 
My understanding is that these aircraft are at sea, and a number of them are engaged in some training exercises. 
Were we criticized for not being able to live up to our obligations?  
Senator Graham :
Not to my knowledge. 
It is my understanding that those helicopters are at sea on exercises. 
As to precisely where they are, on whatever ocean, I cannot positively say. 
It might be a military secret, as a matter of fact.  
Federal-Provincial Relations 
 Honourable senators , I should like to associate myself with those senators who preceded me in paying tribute to Senator Rizzuto
 , I tribute associate to . with Honourable paying myself Senator in who me preceded to senators senators Rizzuto should those
 tribute Senator paying should , senators to Rizzuto senators . in preceded those with who I to me like myself Honourable
 with . who tribute to , senators those senators preceded I like should myself Honourable me in to associate Rizzuto Senator
Senator Rizzuto was very active in community work. 
 very . active in Rizzuto work community Senator was
 work Rizzuto . very in Senator community was active
 was Senator Rizzuto active in . very community work
 work . in was community very Rizzuto active Senator
 work community . very active in Senator Rizzuto was
 Rizzuto community work Senator active in very . was
 was active in Senator work very Rizzuto community .
 work community Rizzuto very . was active Senator in
 community was . very Senator active work in Rizzuto
 was very active . in Rizzuto Senator work community
 Rizzuto was . Senator community in very active work
 work community active Senator was very Rizzuto in .
 very active community in was . work Senator Rizzuto
 was very active community . work Rizzuto in Senator
 Senator was work in Rizzuto active community . very
 very Rizzuto active Senator community work in . was
And I stress this last part: 
...given current commitments to action.  
Could the Leader of the Government tell us if the relevant ministers are aware of this study, whether there have been any responses, or what the reaction has been to this prestigious firm's study?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
It provides very important data. 
I am not sure the government would necessarily agree with the findings of the study but, certainly, those findings will be taken into consideration.  
Senator Spivak :
I am glad to hear that.  
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Concept of Differing Targets-Government Position 
Hon. Mira Spivak :
In the current discussions in Kyoto, the idea of tailoring reductions targets to individual countries' economic and social profiles rather than having a one-size-fits-all commitment has gained some currency, particularly in view of the most recent American proposal. 
Where does the Canadian delegation stand with respect to this concept?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government):
Honourable senators, the media is reporting, of course, on a possible deal on targets and time-tables which could see Canada accepting a reduction of 5 per cent from 1990 levels bythe year 2010. 
At this point, these reports are speculative, but negotiations are ongoing.  
National Unity 
Recent Remarks of Prime Minister-Possible Conditions of Secession of Quebec-Government Position 
Hon. Pierre Claude Nolin :
Honourable senators, I would like to return to the matter of the Prime Minister's statement last weekend on Quebec's secession. 
He said in fact last week in Quebec City that he would be prepared to negotiate Quebec's separation, if certain conditions were met.  
 Senator Rizzuto was very active in community work
 Rizzuto Senator . community in active work very
 . active Senator community Rizzuto work in was
 very in active community work Senator was Rizzuto
He was president and founder of the Federation of Italian Associations of Quebec and founder of the Quebec Chapter of the National Congress of Italian Canadian Foundation, an organization which became national in scope and was established for the purpose of providing a voice for the dozens of associations and clubs of Italian origin in every part of Canada.  
 of Italian Chapter Quebec of . every in providing of the a president dozens Italian Associations associations clubs voice part became and of of for and of Federation origin Canadian in national the was of organization which of purpose for of established Congress an and , Italian and Canada scope the founder Foundation the Quebec He founder National of the was
 for the providing Italian purpose Chapter of of dozens became the the and and of Congress and Italian the in origin was of and founder clubs part Federation of which established He Italian . organization Canadian the in scope a of for an national National voice Foundation was Quebec Canada every founder associations of of president of , Associations of Quebec
 of established , in national . Italian a of providing for in of and part dozens Chapter founder purpose of of Italian and voice scope Canada He president Federation of Italian an was Quebec for Associations of of associations Quebec founder of clubs which the the origin Foundation and the every of Canadian organization National and Congress the was became the
 the every dozens of established and of of of of clubs Foundation in became national National in scope voice Congress , and Italian which of founder origin the an . Chapter Associations Quebec the organization Italian part for of founder Canada Canadian for a president providing was Federation and associations Quebec of the the Italian He purpose of and was of
 president the Associations Italian providing the the National of He a of of of dozens of and every . Foundation the and founder clubs of of Chapter for Federation origin , of which purpose Italian and founder in scope for Congress was voice of associations organization Quebec national Italian became was Canada an and in Quebec of the Canadian established part
 of of the Italian and founder voice National the part which of a Italian Associations for Italian Federation the the purpose in every Canada national Foundation Canadian in Congress and an Quebec origin , of of became for and president dozens of was . associations He of clubs providing scope of was and founder established of organization of Chapter the Quebec
 the and He of Quebec clubs in Federation Canadian . of of organization in was dozens founder Congress became and Chapter Italian a and of every of established for Italian an Foundation of National purpose which of Quebec national Italian founder the part and the Associations providing of Canada the voice of for origin the was president of scope , associations
 president Italian scope the which Italian Foundation of an in Canadian the of and voice part was established became in clubs Chapter Quebec He for of of Federation every Quebec Canada national . , organization of Associations for the of associations of Congress of dozens purpose and founder providing and of a was Italian National the the origin and founder of
 an part Federation Quebec in Canadian of of of the was Quebec in of Associations of of founder clubs of of the National Chapter the Canada established of associations was voice Italian Congress every became and and Foundation , purpose president scope He Italian of dozens and the and for origin the providing Italian for organization which founder . national a
 origin part which was Quebec associations and the . Congress of every Italian and of founder and National clubs Associations the Canadian of an in became of scope purpose of Federation Italian of Foundation the providing of in for of dozens and Italian president organization a was of national Canada the , Chapter established of voice founder for He the Quebec
 founder Congress and of part Quebec Foundation , became in an purpose of for established of the the dozens scope a the of of Associations Quebec clubs origin Italian of which for Italian Canadian president Canada Italian organization . was of of providing associations National of and and national and voice was He of in every Chapter the the Federation founder
 associations Italian of of National part and . Chapter in became Quebec purpose of every providing of of Congress established the and founder , Quebec Canada and the was founder the Canadian president of origin organization for was an in scope dozens of national for clubs Foundation a of He and which the of of Federation Italian the Italian Associations voice
 of organization providing Canadian of and part was clubs Associations Congress voice Italian He Quebec Italian Italian founder of . was an of and and national of president the Federation in of the of origin which established of Chapter became of for scope every , the a of Canada National and in the purpose for Quebec founder Foundation associations dozens the
 origin founder of president of an the was and of established every the Italian the Italian associations Congress providing organization was the Foundation Italian for dozens Federation for of founder became Canadian National scope voice the He of of and clubs of of Quebec in national and in part Associations Chapter a of . purpose Quebec of Canada which and ,
 established president Congress every Quebec associations Foundation the He dozens Canada Italian and scope Italian a origin organization of part of of which was National Italian founder an Chapter . providing in of Canadian Associations for and founder purpose the for clubs voice and in of , Federation Quebec the of became of of of national the the was of and
 . clubs established in every of , Italian purpose Canadian of He scope associations was of Canada dozens Foundation National for the Italian in Associations voice and of the of which the founder and for and Quebec of organization Quebec of an and president national was Federation Congress the Chapter providing origin the of became a of Italian of founder part
They have changed. 
Now they want a smaller CPP.  
However, Preston Manning could never explain the first program. 
Now they have a CPP program which they wanted to explain to the minister in committee. 
Well, they could not get it together. 
Preston Manning, who made a promise to do it before committee meetings ended in the other place, failed to do it. 
I can see why.  
They are making false accusations in the House about people. 
It is the typical Reform program we have come to expect. 
They are off in left field somewhere, although I do not think they would want to be described that way.  
Now they want to create a super-RRSP, which does not make any sense because, not only is it at odds with what they said in committee and what they said in the election campaign, it does not fit into their tax plan. 
Remember, they have a tax plan with a flat tax. 
With the flat tax, you reduce the amount of exemptions. 
We are not getting any ideas from them.  
Now I will turn to the Liberals.  
Senator Gigantès :
Be careful.  
Senator Tkachuk :
Since taking office, they have taken $300 million in new taxes from senior citizens by income-testing the age credit. 
They want Canadians to mature their RRSPs by the year they turn 69 rather than the previous age limit of 71. 
 He was president and founder of the Federation of Italian Associations of Quebec and founder of Quebec Chapter of the National Congress of Italian Canadian Foundation , an organization which became national in scope and was established for the purpose of providing a voice for the dozens of associations and clubs of Italian origin in every part of Canada .
 Quebec Chapter of origin , the Associations the Congress a part was and scope the of dozens of Italian the founder clubs Foundation established every and of of the . of and for of which Canada national voice organization Federation for founder purpose Italian and of associations was National of of providing became Canadian Quebec in He in an president
 associations became clubs origin of Italian voice the Italian Congress founder organization of national part for a the He dozens of Associations scope and an in Quebec of of and and purpose of founder Federation Chapter National which Quebec was providing established of . the the of for Italian , Canada of in the Canadian and every was Foundation of
 providing the every of Italian purpose and , for . of national the Associations He of Canadian the of founder Italian and of president Congress of and became Federation in in an of National Foundation the and clubs origin scope Chapter dozens organization was voice part Canada founder of a was Italian Quebec of established the of for associations Quebec
It was through the NCIC that I met Senator Rizzuto in the mid-1970s. 
 mid the that in 1970s It Senator NCIC the . through was I Rizzuto - met
 the Senator through the NCIC - mid It Rizzuto 1970s in was met . I that
 met It - 1970s Senator was through . that NCIC the the mid Rizzuto I in
 NCIC Senator It the through . that the mid 1970s in - I Rizzuto was met
 the - It NCIC through 1970s Senator the met mid I was . Rizzuto in that
 . Senator NCIC the met that through in - 1970s Rizzuto the mid I was It
 NCIC 1970s mid Senator Rizzuto - through was the the . in met I It that
 met in NCIC It the - I Rizzuto Senator . the that through mid was 1970s
 met It in NCIC that was 1970s Rizzuto Senator the mid - I . through the
 Rizzuto Senator mid 1970s met through NCIC . that It was - I the in the
 Rizzuto Senator It the that through - 1970s was NCIC met . in mid I the
 . was 1970s mid in the through met It Senator NCIC - that I the Rizzuto
 - the the through 1970s NCIC mid that I Rizzuto . Senator was in met It
 that - through was 1970s mid . Senator Rizzuto NCIC the in It the I met
 met the It the in Rizzuto mid Senator - . that I NCIC was 1970s through
 the 1970s NCIC It in Rizzuto Senator mid that . was met I the through -
On November 20, I said: 
Honourable senators, I wish to address my question to the Leader of the Government in the Senate. 
It dates back to October 1, 1997, to a question asked at that time by Senator Meighen, which is only 51 days ago.  
I will quote Senator Meighen, who said: 
It has been 51 days!  
On November 25, I said the following: 
In a paper released the week prior to November 25, the Association of Canadian Pension Management said that the Seniors Benefit will stifle savings. 
To quote from their paper: 
Middle-income Canadians might simply decide to supplement government programs through the accumulation of non-income producing capital, such as homes or interest-free mortgages for their children. 
They may simply avoid retirement savings plans that generate heavily taxed income...  
They go on to suggest that Ottawa structure the Seniors Benefit in such a way that it will not result in an effective tax rate in excess of 50 per cent.  
Was the government listening when I asked that question? 
Senator Graham said, "Of course, yes." 
Did the Leader of the Government in the Senate read The Financial Post editorial that morning in which it was recommended that this problem be changed to reflect such an issue? 
From what I understand, in the other place all amendments have been struck down and no further amendments are coming forward. 
As we know, no amendments were passed.  
Changes to pension legislation represents one of the largest issues facing seniors as they move into retirement. 
Seniors, as a whole, do not know about these changes. 
Has the government developed a communications plan to inform Canadians of this issue prior to the passage of this bill? 
To that inquiry, Senator Graham replied, "Yes." 
 It was through the NCIC I met Senator Rizzuto in the mid - 1970s .
 was through - I NCIC the the that met It Senator mid 1970s in Rizzuto
 the It - Rizzuto met mid Senator NCIC was through the in . I 1970s
 Rizzuto that . NCIC the Senator through mid - was It the met in 1970s
In 1976, when a major earthquake hit the region of Friuli, the National Congress of Italian Canadians organized a fund-raising campaign to help the victims of that earthquake, raising sufficient funds to build 190 permanent housing units and two senior citizen homes which provided accommodation for some 900 persons. 
 - the raising persons region Canadians the senior funds , units victims earthquake two hit Congress major campaign that of National sufficient and . the housing organized which when fund to of for to of Italian raising 1976 , help , homes 900 provided some accommodation build Friuli earthquake a citizen 190 a In permanent
 homes to earthquake - Friuli the region housing when senior to 1976 the raising accommodation for of provided In some hit units , of that victims earthquake major campaign , organized Canadians , funds build . which National Congress permanent 900 Italian of a citizen the sufficient two a help persons fund and 190 raising
 some funds of build two when . 1976 citizen homes of 190 900 the a Congress , hit a Italian the to of housing permanent help earthquake raising In region units sufficient persons for raising earthquake Friuli National senior , that and accommodation to , which major the victims Canadians - organized fund campaign provided
 which a , raising of some build organized 190 Friuli for major sufficient of the homes citizen 1976 , units to persons to and Italian earthquake when fund accommodation . a hit victims region help that the In of National - two permanent campaign housing 900 provided the earthquake , Canadians raising funds Congress senior
 units Congress , homes hit and of which accommodation . a when provided senior permanent funds earthquake Friuli two help Italian for 900 earthquake the the housing to campaign of the some a major citizen National that 1976 sufficient Canadians , of fund , persons organized - build raising victims region In to raising 190
 senior , , National hit the 190 of earthquake raising to permanent which funds the major - a build and provided region Congress raising help persons that . Friuli sufficient Canadians citizen homes of a Italian when for some earthquake to accommodation organized victims of units 900 , two housing the 1976 campaign In fund
 for a 190 earthquake Congress Canadians . the which accommodation of some victims housing homes to funds earthquake to , and the two of raising National major region sufficient 1976 provided of 900 senior build help citizen the that persons when Friuli permanent a raising fund , , - In hit campaign organized units Italian
 campaign a some when victims Italian hit - accommodation , which earthquake National citizen to of housing 900 Canadians persons two raising to Congress fund raising earthquake the organized homes provided major the sufficient of and permanent 1976 the , that of . Friuli In build a region 190 senior help , funds units for
 , - Canadians raising build the 190 , two citizen earthquake housing raising some funds a provided Italian region . to to of units a organized when 900 persons earthquake that In senior help sufficient National campaign major for , accommodation the homes of permanent of and fund the hit 1976 which Congress Friuli victims
 which Canadians National , when to - fund the 1976 of In 190 persons provided , units a region senior the for hit earthquake the Italian , some that 900 sufficient earthquake . to citizen two Friuli and of a funds organized permanent victims accommodation help raising build homes housing campaign raising Congress of major
 to fund funds sufficient victims help , 900 a raising earthquake the accommodation Canadians when of Italian earthquake two , which housing for and of the organized build to persons a campaign units 190 homes senior permanent raising of region provided the that hit Congress , National some 1976 - citizen In Friuli major .
 In fund major National 1976 funds victims citizen , two . the housing senior of Friuli of homes earthquake and campaign to , for persons raising region help organized , 900 when hit a of permanent raising the which Italian - earthquake provided Congress a build sufficient the some to units accommodation that 190 Canadians
 permanent sufficient of to . citizen , Congress region funds which Canadians units that accommodation Italian victims , - to the two 1976 a earthquake the persons of earthquake major In provided senior a 900 raising fund when help housing for , raising build the campaign Friuli organized 190 some hit National of and homes
 In persons Congress that homes region some 190 - to permanent campaign build to when Friuli raising two 1976 , hit the a provided the victims fund sufficient of the Canadians earthquake help for units a National , 900 housing organized Italian citizen accommodation , senior of earthquake which of . major funds and raising
 raising permanent which 190 a to that the campaign accommodation homes - fund . 900 of hit Italian citizen major region a housing 1976 to the when provided some , earthquake senior sufficient Congress organized , Canadians funds build victims two In raising of and Friuli for the persons earthquake National , help units of
 190 Friuli two fund when which housing 900 homes for raising , of units persons that senior provided the , of - accommodation In raising some organized . a 1976 permanent of the and a hit major earthquake Congress citizen the Italian , earthquake build Canadians sufficient to region National victims help to campaign funds
ADJOURNMENT 
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58(1) h ), I move, seconded by the Honourable Senator De Bané: 
That when the Senate adjourns today, it do stand adjourned until tomorrow, Wednesday, December 10, 1997, at 1:30 p.m. 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is leave granted, honourable senators?  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
Motion agreed to.  
International Assembly of French-Speaking Parliamentarians 
Meeting held in Luxembourg-Report of Canadian Section Tabled 
Hon. Pierre De Bané :
Honourable senators, pursuant to rule 23(6) of the Senate, I have the honour to present, in both official languages, the reports of the Canadian section of the International Assembly of French-Speaking Parliamentarians as well as the financial report of the 23rd regular session of the IAFSP and its executive committee, held in Luxembourg from July 7 to July 10, 1997.  
Foreign Affairs 
Committee Authorized to Meet During Sitting of the Senate 
Hon. John B. Stewart :
Honourable senators, with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58(1)( a ), I move: 
That the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs have power to sit at 3:15 p.m. tomorrow, Wednesday, December 10, even though the Senate may then be sitting, and that rule 95(4) be suspended in relation thereto.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is leave granted, honourable senators?  
 In 1976 , when a major earthquake hit the of Friuli , the National Congress of Italian Canadians organized a fund - raising campaign to help the victims of that earthquake , raising sufficient funds to build 190 permanent housing units and two senior citizen homes which provided accommodation for some 900 persons .
 earthquake help homes 190 1976 - the for Italian a fund earthquake raising that the organized two and some which , Congress to senior major Friuli campaign raising build , . citizen Canadians accommodation the victims of permanent region when 900 , units hit provided housing of funds In to a of National sufficient
 raising to of when victims - a the a hit earthquake the National Italian persons funds earthquake raising that fund 190 900 Friuli . to , of organized senior provided sufficient of permanent two campaign citizen accommodation Canadians units and build help 1976 , some the , for Congress homes housing which In region
 to permanent funds Italian the and 190 units provided hit citizen campaign of for two raising . senior earthquake , of 1976 the which - , earthquake of region help accommodation organized raising 900 major Canadians sufficient some housing when fund a a Friuli the to Congress persons In victims National build homes that
It was during this period that I worked very closely with Senator Rizzuto and learned to appreciate his qualities. 
 that appreciate qualities closely Rizzuto during this Senator was his and to . very with worked It learned period I
 Rizzuto I that learned and was . qualities this during It closely to Senator worked with period very his appreciate
 qualities that and period appreciate closely learned to this worked with very I It during . his was Rizzuto Senator
 that this closely was Senator very during It to with qualities period I appreciate learned worked and Rizzuto . his
 period that I was with very Rizzuto and his appreciate this Senator . learned qualities closely It during worked to
 closely learned was I with his during period to and Rizzuto . this that Senator very It worked appreciate qualities
 appreciate with this learned his and that during Rizzuto worked Senator I closely to was very period . It qualities
 Senator It this and qualities worked period . closely that appreciate very learned was his I during Rizzuto with to
 was that his qualities Rizzuto with very worked to closely I Senator period learned appreciate . It this and during
 period Rizzuto his appreciate It was to with worked closely qualities this I . Senator very learned and that during
 was and Rizzuto with this It to closely learned his Senator during I appreciate qualities worked very period that .
 to I It worked qualities period and closely during this Rizzuto his was . very appreciate with Senator learned that
 . Rizzuto period was his appreciate very and this worked during closely to qualities with that It I Senator learned
 with Senator It and very was to learned during closely appreciate his . period this qualities Rizzuto worked that I
 learned worked Rizzuto very to his and appreciate I period this closely It with during . Senator qualities that was
 worked and Senator learned his closely very to Rizzuto during appreciate period . that was with this I It qualities
There they found Mr. Feeney asleep. 
Obviously the bludgeoning of the victim had tired him and he had gone to sleep. 
He still had blood on his face and on his shirt. 
The police checked the trailer, and they found the money, stolen from Mr. Boyle, hidden under the mattress. 
They arrested Mr. Feeney under a warrantless arrest.  
I think that individual must have been trained by Sergeant Fiegenwald because there was certainly every reason to arrest Mr. Feeney.  
Prior to the Constitution Act, 1982, the police had that authority in the case of hot pursuit. 
It is my interpretation that they still possess that authority. 
It is not enshrined in the Criminal Code. 
It is one of those principles that came into our law from the British system. 
As Senator Cools pointed out, no statute was broken. 
Therefore, the federal requirement that all federal laws must comply with the Charter of Rights and Freedoms was not affected.  
Yesterday, Senator Beaudoin was explaining the different parts of the Constitution, the British North America Act of 1867, the Charter of Rights, and so on. 
At times, it appears the Supreme Court of Canada considers that the Constitution consists only of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 
Despite all the evidence - the stolen truck, the blood on the accused - the judges were only interested in one thing, and that was the arrest warrant. 
There was no warrant because the police acted on the spot when they had the accused, and I think they acted quite properly.  
Honourable senators, the Supreme Court ignored the rights of Mr. Boyle. 
Section 7 of the Charter indicates that Mr. Boyle had the right to life, privacy and security of the person, and those rights were not to be taken from him except by and in accordance with the principles of fundamental justice.  
I think the justices of the Supreme Court of Canada should be sent a message reminding them that the victim also had rights under the Charter.  
In all fairness, honourable senators, I must say that three of the justices dissented with the majority decision. 
 It was during this period that I worked closely with Senator Rizzuto and learned to appreciate his qualities .
 very appreciate to . learned his qualities Rizzuto It with worked during closely period I this and that Senator
 his closely qualities . that to appreciate this and with Senator learned very worked It period I during Rizzuto
 appreciate was . with Senator Rizzuto closely I worked learned very to during that period qualities and It his
He was a person of commitment and dedication, and he made a great contribution to the project of assistance to the earthquake homeless of Friuli. 
 assistance of and a Friuli contribution earthquake to project the commitment person to , a great homeless He and . he dedication made of the was of
 person commitment and contribution a to great project homeless He assistance the , of of made the dedication Friuli of . a to and he was earthquake
 the a earthquake He to person homeless commitment of great a project . to he dedication and made was and of of assistance Friuli the contribution ,
 dedication commitment earthquake he contribution of project He great person the Friuli made and the to of was a of assistance a homeless and , to .
 , to and the He was the of Friuli great dedication he assistance a of and a homeless made . contribution project commitment of person to earthquake
 the was to Friuli earthquake , a dedication person homeless project made He the great and a to he . of of assistance commitment contribution of and
 Friuli project , he commitment of person was to earthquake and dedication the contribution to assistance and of great . a a of made the homeless He
 contribution dedication person homeless to of a Friuli made was of He commitment great the he project earthquake . and assistance to of a the and ,
 Friuli of he earthquake contribution project of a great . was of a homeless and made , the commitment He to and the dedication person assistance to
 person the of Friuli to . assistance to commitment of and great of earthquake He a homeless a he contribution made project dedication , was and the
 He great he homeless of person a and commitment of and Friuli earthquake project to dedication to assistance the made was . contribution of the , a
 Friuli assistance the project of contribution of and he earthquake dedication a made a commitment homeless , person the of and great . to He was to
 , contribution dedication was of homeless earthquake great assistance He person commitment a a to to . of and project and the the of Friuli he made
 contribution earthquake the to and great Friuli made project of person and was the of . commitment assistance a , homeless he to dedication He a of
 of a assistance earthquake made and dedication commitment homeless . was he a contribution of to the great He and to of person the project , Friuli
 he project Friuli dedication homeless person assistance the , and of earthquake the contribution and . made He a of was of to to a great commitment
This morning, the Quebec minister of intergovernmental affairs, Mr. Brassard, said, and I quote: 
This is what we have always said.  
Bear in mind that this minister is a separatist. 
I repeat what he said: 
This is what we have always said.  
Mr. Chrétien has acknowledged that the federal government would negotiate. 
Could the Leader of the Government in the Senate tell us under what authority the Prime Minister could negotiate?  
Senator Graham :
The Prime Minister would be negotiating on behalf of Canadians, but recognizing at the same time that nine other provinces and the territories are involved. 
I am sure the Prime Minister would take all of that into consideration.  
Senator Nolin :
The Supreme Court received the request from your government to decide on the issue of Quebec's secession. 
We will learn in all likelihood from the Supreme Court that the amending formula would be appropriate if Canadians agreed to allow one province to separate from the others. 
Have the Prime Minister, the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs or officials of your government had formal or informal discussions on this matter with the representatives of the nine other provinces?  
Senator Graham :
Not that I am aware, honourable senators. 
We are aware, of course, of the meetings that took place with the premiers in Calgary. 
We know there is a first ministers' conference later this week in Ottawa, at which this matter may or may not arise. 
However, I am not aware that there have been discussions, either formal or informal, between the Prime Minister and the premiers up to this point in time.  
Immigration 
 He was a person of commitment and dedication , he made a great contribution to the project of assistance to the earthquake homeless of Friuli .
 a earthquake the and Friuli , person to of dedication the and project contribution He of assistance . a homeless of was to commitment made he
 great He assistance person of and dedication project and . to earthquake of contribution a , commitment a to homeless of Friuli he made the was
 the homeless contribution person a dedication great to of of He Friuli of was made commitment assistance to and . earthquake project a the he and
He was involved in community endeavours throughout his life. 
 community his . life was throughout endeavours in He involved
 was involved in He his throughout life endeavours community .
 life endeavours his throughout in . community was He involved
 community throughout his was endeavours involved . He in life
 involved throughout community He endeavours his in life . was
 community was He life his throughout in . involved endeavours
 involved endeavours in throughout was his He life . community
 throughout . in was endeavours his community involved life He
 . community throughout in life involved He was endeavours his
 throughout endeavours community his . in was life involved He
 . endeavours community in was throughout life He involved his
 was throughout endeavours involved his in He . community life
 He throughout was . life endeavours community involved his in
 in endeavours was throughout life He community . his involved
 involved his community . life throughout He endeavours was in
 endeavours He in was involved community his . throughout life
Let me assure the Leader and Deputy Leader of the Opposition that we will do everything on our part to ensure that sessions end on time. 
We did sit yesterday, which was a Monday. 
I can assure senators we will be sitting next Monday in order to fulfil the business of the chamber before the Christmas break.  
Senator Kinsella :
On that basis, I do not think leave is necessary.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is leave granted?  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
He just felt it was not necessary.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Leave is granted.  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is it your pleasure, honourable senators, to adopt the motion?  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
Motion agreed to.  
The Senate 
Conduct of Business-Notice of Inquiry 
 He was involved in endeavours throughout his life .
 . endeavours throughout his involved life He was community
 community was throughout his endeavours life involved He .
 his endeavours involved He life throughout was community in
For his community work, he received many awards, among them, the Honorary Citizen of the City of Laval and the Grande Ufficiale Order of Merit from the Republic of Italy.  
 Citizen from of Laval City For many Grande community Order and awards the the Ufficiale Italy the , his them the of Honorary of work among received . he of , Merit , Republic
 from of community he . the among the , many and Honorary Italy , Laval awards Republic work them Merit of Grande , City Citizen Order of the received of his For the Ufficiale
 the the of of received community Ufficiale Republic Merit City Order and the Laval , Italy , . his For Grande awards work from the Honorary many of among of , he Citizen them
 Ufficiale , of the work Republic received of them among the community many , , from Grande and Italy Laval awards City his the Citizen Merit Honorary the he For of . Order of
 of from among many Citizen the community of , the Merit the he , Italy his Order Laval , . awards them Honorary received Republic Ufficiale City of and work of For the Grande
 , his the awards of and Republic he many . received the of Italy Honorary For , the Merit Order Laval among community from work them Citizen of , Grande Ufficiale City of the
 received community he his , Grande awards For Merit Italy Order , the , work of Laval of many Citizen City the Republic the the and them Ufficiale of among of Honorary from .
 the them his of Grande the Laval work Order he of awards Citizen For . the received Merit , many Republic City , and from community the Italy of Ufficiale among Honorary , of
 of from of received For among Grande Order the Ufficiale the Merit . Citizen , of , Honorary community many Republic City he his of work them awards Italy and the the Laval ,
 Italy community received Grande , , of of work Merit of , of and the he Citizen City the Laval from For his Order among . them the awards the Ufficiale many Republic Honorary
 Order of of . many work them awards Laval Italy Merit the Republic received City community Citizen of he among Grande , , from and the For his the Ufficiale of the Honorary ,
 of his the For of Citizen many Republic community the from them awards the he Merit , received and , Honorary Laval of , Ufficiale Grande . of the among work Italy City Order
 many awards the the received among from of Merit his work he Republic , Citizen , Ufficiale the Honorary of of Laval Order City community the Grande . , and them of Italy For
 Merit he , Citizen the awards the Laval among many Order Italy , the . For work , of Honorary Ufficiale of of community his Grande and Republic them the from of City received
 For Honorary Laval , of among his Citizen he many Order , of . the from received of community Grande work Italy Republic the the Merit and them Ufficiale awards City of , the
 his Laval received of of the he the , , Order of among the Merit many For awards from them City Grande Honorary of Italy the work . Ufficiale Citizen Republic community and ,
Business of the Senate 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
Second Reading-Debate Continued 
Canada Cooperatives Bill 
First Reading 
Criminal Code 
Interpretation Act 
Bill to Amend-Second Reading-Motions in Amendment-Debate Adjourned to Await Ruling of Speaker 
Motion in Sub-Amendment 
Quebec 
Linguistic School Boards-Amendment to Section 93 of Constitution-Report of Special Joint Committee Adopted 
Quebec 
Linguistic School Boards-Motion to Amend Section 93 of Constitution-Debate Adjourned 
Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration 
Sixth Report of Committee Adopted 
Bill to Amend-First Reading 
Canada Marine Bill 
First Reading 
Aboriginal Peoples 
Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples-Committee Authorized to Study Recommendations 
 For his community work , he received many awards , among , the Honorary Citizen of the City of Laval and the Grande Ufficiale Order of Merit from the Republic of Italy .
 of of the of . Italy many , from Grande his Merit Ufficiale the , Order and the among Citizen he received them Laval the Honorary awards Republic , City work For of
 among from and the Grande of community Ufficiale his Republic For Honorary of of them , Italy of Order the the the he . received awards , Laval many , work City Merit
 received Citizen the of Grande community of and City work many Ufficiale of Italy of the For he among . awards , his them , , Order from the Laval Republic the Merit
Senator Rizzuto, from a humble beginning, rose to become a prominent businessman, a spokesperson for the Italian community, and a successful politician. 
 successful a to rose become . politician a a , for and Rizzuto a from community Senator , spokesperson prominent the businessman , , beginning humble Italian
 businessman beginning prominent a from spokesperson . Rizzuto community a , to humble a Senator become for , politician rose the and Italian successful , , a
 humble and from rose , become to the a a spokesperson businessman , beginning Italian , politician , prominent a community for . Senator a Rizzuto successful
 Italian politician , community to a , a successful Senator the a for become a Rizzuto humble from and prominent , beginning spokesperson rose businessman . ,
 prominent businessman to a . Italian from a Senator for beginning become rose a , successful humble , and a spokesperson , community Rizzuto politician , the
 politician a and , , become from Rizzuto a . , for businessman Senator rose humble the prominent community to spokesperson successful , a Italian beginning a
 a , community Italian successful politician the , prominent . a businessman beginning , become , to and spokesperson a from a Rizzuto for Senator rose humble
 politician Senator a , to prominent Italian the businessman , , rose beginning . humble become spokesperson from and a for , Rizzuto a community a successful
 Senator , , from and beginning successful . for humble a , a Italian politician a prominent rose become community a the Rizzuto to , spokesperson businessman
 politician beginning a Rizzuto , prominent rose to Senator the become , , a successful humble Italian and from a for a community , . businessman spokesperson
 a humble Senator politician . become community for a a from and Rizzuto , , to spokesperson , a businessman beginning prominent the , successful Italian rose
 from politician to , , for a a a Italian become Senator the beginning community spokesperson and , , businessman Rizzuto rose humble a . prominent successful
 prominent a and politician , a . , Senator beginning the Italian successful , humble a to for community rose Rizzuto from become , spokesperson businessman a
 Senator humble businessman prominent for rose Rizzuto beginning a . , , community Italian politician spokesperson a , become a to a , successful the from and
 humble and spokesperson Senator , a , politician a community Rizzuto to become for beginning from successful businessman rose a Italian , a prominent , . the
 . a a Senator from become , successful Rizzuto prominent and politician to , beginning rose community a , spokesperson the a , for humble Italian businessman
On motion of Senator Kirby, bill placed on the Orders of the Day for third reading at the next sitting of the Senate.  
Present State and Future of Agriculture 
Report of Agriculture and Forestry Committee Tabled 
Hon. Leonard J. Gustafson :
Honourable senators, I have the honour to table the second report of the Standing Senate Committee on Agriculture and Forestry, which requests that the committee be empowered to incur special expenses pursuant to the Procedural Guidelines for the Financial Operation of Senate Committees .  
I ask that this report be printed as an appendix to the Journals of the Senate of this day.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is it agreed, honourable senators?  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this report be taken into consideration?  
On motion of Senator Gustafson, report placed on the Orders the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate.  
Present State and Future of Forestry 
Report of Agriculture and Forestry Committee Tabled 
Hon. Leonard J. Gustafson :
Honourable senators, I have the honour to table the third report of the Standing Senate Committee on Agriculture and Forestry, with a request that the committee be empowered to incur special expenses pursuant to the Procedural Guidelines for the Financial Operation of Senate Committees .  
I ask that the report be printed as an appendix to the Journals of the Senate of this day.  
( For text of report, see today's Journals of the Senate, Appendix "B", p. 321. 
The Hon. the Speaker :
 Senator Rizzuto from a humble beginning , rose to become a prominent businessman , a spokesperson for the Italian community , and a successful politician .
 a . Italian politician , from , community to the Senator , beginning businessman and spokesperson for rose successful prominent become a a a Rizzuto ,
 humble the a politician for community , spokesperson , successful Italian a a , rose businessman to Rizzuto a prominent . , beginning Senator become and
 for . rose a , and the politician a spokesperson , become Senator prominent humble , to community Rizzuto beginning from businessman successful a a ,
He occupied positions of great prestige in the Liberal party: co-chairman of the National Election Readiness Committee and President of the Quebec Electoral Commission of the Liberal Party in 1986.  
 in in of the Election Party Quebec Liberal National . President Electoral occupied the and of Readiness chairman great the of : the of He co - prestige 1986 Commission party positions Committee Liberal
 Readiness the the of Quebec co great Commission National prestige Committee in of Party of in Liberal . party the of positions Liberal : 1986 He Election Electoral President occupied the chairman - and
 of Party positions and Readiness the . Commission Liberal occupied President in Electoral of Liberal prestige great the : co the of - Quebec He Election chairman party Committee of the in 1986 National
 in : great of 1986 Quebec He Committee National in party President Commission the of chairman and occupied Readiness Party of positions of prestige Liberal co the the Election the - . Electoral Liberal
 Committee the of : He of in positions National co chairman Liberal the Election the of great Readiness occupied prestige 1986 Quebec - the Commission of and Liberal . party Electoral in Party President
 1986 of the positions great the Quebec He Election and of National Party President : in Liberal party chairman the . of Commission co occupied prestige the Committee - Liberal Electoral Readiness in of
 1986 chairman : and the of in Party party the Liberal President of Commission of co Quebec Liberal positions the Committee the great - of in Readiness Election prestige . National occupied Electoral He
 party prestige Election of the 1986 in of National : in He . Commission and the of of Electoral great Quebec positions Committee Party the chairman the Liberal Readiness Liberal co occupied - President
 in - National Commission Liberal of of Committee of Party the positions Quebec great 1986 Electoral of : . party occupied Election Liberal Readiness the and President He prestige the in chairman co the
 Liberal chairman 1986 Party Readiness prestige Quebec the positions of of National in . Election Committee and Liberal great President the co of the He Commission occupied Electoral : in party - the of
 party Liberal the occupied in Party : of He of positions the the and great Liberal of of 1986 Commission National . co President Quebec Electoral - in prestige Election the Readiness Committee chairman
 of Commission Quebec positions Party 1986 - of party the occupied Liberal of of the great prestige in Liberal President Electoral Readiness Election National chairman : the co He the in . and Committee
 the Party and co Quebec Liberal in Committee . Commission Readiness : - great Electoral President of He National chairman of positions party the of occupied in Election 1986 Liberal prestige the of the
 co Election great Liberal Liberal in the Committee of of occupied Electoral the Commission prestige the National Readiness positions of in and the Party chairman party . Quebec - of President 1986 He :
 Liberal of of chairman of party 1986 of Election - Quebec occupied President He National great Liberal . Party prestige positions Electoral in the the the Commission the and co in Committee : Readiness
 of the : the Liberal of Committee and chairman Liberal National President He of Election . Electoral of positions Commission Readiness prestige the Quebec Party co 1986 occupied party in in - the great
That is what section 93 says.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
No, section 93 does not say that.  
Senator Grafstein :
The Province of Quebec, by its lawfully elected assembly, has requested a resolution amending the Constitution. 
How can I ask them to respect the Constitution if I do not respect the Constitution? 
I respect the Constitution.  
Honourable senators, this is a lawful request done in a lawful way. 
Perhaps certain words are egregious, but it is done in a lawful way, and I am prepared to support them. 
To my mind, the fact that they are prepared to proceed with their reforms before we legislate in any way, shape or form is their business; it is not my business. 
My business is to uphold the Constitution when they request we uphold processes under the Constitution.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
The reform of the school system in Quebec has nothing to do with the Constitution, even less with section 93. 
That was admitted in front of the committee.  
I will give you the answer to my question, and it should trouble all of us. 
The answer is that Quebec wants to be exempted from providing Catholic and Protestant teaching in the public school system. 
It has nothing to do with the linguistic school system, which will be in place - if the calendar is met - before the beginning of the next school year. 
They want to erase religious instruction from the school system, which is imposed on them. 
Narrow as it may be, unfair as it may be, and discriminatory as it may be, it was still renewed in 1982 and given protection from the Charter only 15 years ago. 
That is the reason. 
 He occupied positions of great prestige in the Liberal party : co - chairman of the National Election Readiness Committee and President of the Quebec Commission of the Liberal Party in 1986 .
 Liberal Readiness the : the of Electoral in Commission prestige National Election co Party the . of President 1986 the occupied and Quebec great He - Committee Liberal party chairman of positions in
 great Quebec of Party co the - party in : and chairman positions in Election National occupied the prestige the 1986 Commission Liberal of . Electoral of the of Readiness Liberal Committee He
 of Liberal co the of President National Electoral in of chairman Commission He Party Liberal Quebec - occupied 1986 Election of Committee . the party : the Readiness great prestige in positions and
However, above all, Senator Rizzuto was a family man, a loving husband and an affectionate father. 
 man above , , , family was Rizzuto all and a an affectionate a However Senator loving . husband father
 , a However all husband Rizzuto was Senator above . family man an loving , and , a father affectionate
 family , an all and above Senator . loving affectionate , a a , husband Rizzuto father man However was
 family a husband a all and father man was , , . an Senator , above Rizzuto However loving affectionate
 and However , Senator a Rizzuto man husband a family was father . all affectionate an , above loving ,
 all However . a an Senator husband a man and , above father Rizzuto loving , family , affectionate was
 all father affectionate loving an and . husband man Senator Rizzuto above , was , , a family a However
 , above Senator family an a all loving Rizzuto However , man husband a affectionate father was , and .
 affectionate family and loving husband Rizzuto a Senator , man However , all , . an father above was a
 an affectionate Rizzuto above man husband a . and , father loving , family all Senator , was However a
 affectionate However was above a family , father man , husband Senator loving all , Rizzuto a . an and
 affectionate . Rizzuto , husband family a an father and However all man Senator a loving , , was above
 Senator loving , However , an father and a all above affectionate . a husband was Rizzuto family man ,
 , father an a a , Rizzuto all man Senator above However loving was . , affectionate husband and family
 and all a an , However , was a loving Senator man . Rizzuto affectionate husband , father above family
 Rizzuto However Senator loving , , affectionate and a husband , a above family . man an was all father
I think I am getting to honourable senators opposite.  
I was told by the Honourable Senator Kirby that members opposite would only have one speaker on this issue. 
I have a feeling that we may hear from a few more senators after I and other senators point out some of the weaknesses in Bill C-2.  
Honourable senators, I would reiterate that this is not a pension program: this is a payroll tax! 
In the past, it harboured cheap loans for provinces, and it will harbour a $100-billion fund that will grow to a $1-trillion fund. 
Honourable senators, we will not need to pay the price. 
We will be long gone before the young people who starting out now, and who expect a pension plan when they grow old, will reap the benefits of what we sow today.  
Honourable senators on this side and honourable senators on the other side, I do not know why you would want to rush this bill. 
What is in it for you? 
What is in it for the Minister of Finance? 
What is in it for anyone to rush this bill through Parliament by December 19? 
No reasonable explanation has been given to me, and I am sure no reasonable explanation has been given to my honourable friends, other than the PMO, Mr. Goldenberg and Mr. Martin, telling you to pass this bill by December 19. 
They are telling you not to think about the consequences, because they are right. 
How do we know they are right? 
Why not take more time, honourable senators?  
Senator Gigantès :
Having listened to you, we know they are right.  
Senator Tkachuk :
Why not take the time - 
Senator Gigantès :
 However , above all , Senator Rizzuto was a family man a loving husband and an affectionate father .
 Senator all family a was loving , However father , , above . an Rizzuto husband and affectionate a
 . loving affectionate a man Rizzuto husband all and family , , , above Senator was a father However
 Senator family husband loving was , , above father affectionate Rizzuto all However a . a an , and
To Mrs. Rizzuto and her family, my heartfelt condolences.  
 , family Mrs . and condolences my heartfelt To her . Rizzuto
 Mrs my . heartfelt and To . her , family Rizzuto condolences
 heartfelt her my and , . Rizzuto . condolences Mrs family To
 To my . family and Mrs heartfelt her . condolences , Rizzuto
 . her and Mrs To . family Rizzuto , my condolences heartfelt
 , . To Mrs and family . Rizzuto my her heartfelt condolences
 Rizzuto . To . family condolences and heartfelt , her my Mrs
 condolences heartfelt my , . and To family Mrs . her Rizzuto
 , Mrs heartfelt my . To and Rizzuto . family her condolences
 . condolences . my her family Mrs heartfelt , Rizzuto and To
 . Rizzuto my , family Mrs . her To and condolences heartfelt
 my condolences Mrs heartfelt , her . and family . Rizzuto To
 Mrs my . heartfelt . and condolences , her family To Rizzuto
 , To condolences family my Rizzuto Mrs heartfelt . and her .
 To family . Rizzuto Mrs . , her and heartfelt condolences my
 and , my her To Rizzuto . condolences family . heartfelt Mrs
Is leave granted, honourable senators?  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
Motion agreed to.  
International Assembly of French-Speaking Parliamentarians 
Meeting held in Luxembourg-Report of Canadian Section Tabled 
Hon. Pierre De Bané :
Honourable senators, pursuant to rule 23(6) of the Senate, I have the honour to present, in both official languages, the reports of the Canadian section of the International Assembly of French-Speaking Parliamentarians as well as the financial report of the 23rd regular session of the IAFSP and its executive committee, held in Luxembourg from July 7 to July 10, 1997.  
Foreign Affairs 
Committee Authorized to Meet During Sitting of the Senate 
Hon. John B. Stewart :
Honourable senators, with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58(1)( a ), I move: 
That the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs have power to sit at 3:15 p.m. tomorrow, Wednesday, December 10, even though the Senate may then be sitting, and that rule 95(4) be suspended in relation thereto.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is leave granted, honourable senators?  
Hon. Noël A. Kinsella (Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition) :
Honourable senators, in the past two years or so, there has been a common understanding in this chamber that Wednesdays would constitute a short day. 
This is why we have been meeting at 1:30 p.m. The general understanding is that we try to finish our business in the chamber by about 3:30 p.m. 
In the past few weeks, we have heard requests like the one raised by the Honourable Senator Stewart. 
If the request speaks to a Tuesday or a Thursday, when we normally meet at 2 p.m. and sit a little longer, there would be no difficulty, all things being equal, in granting leave. 
 To Mrs . Rizzuto and her family , my condolences .
 and . my heartfelt . , condolences family Rizzuto To Mrs
 , . my To . Mrs heartfelt Rizzuto family condolences her
 her family Mrs To heartfelt condolences . , Rizzuto my and
The Hon. John Buchanan :
 The Buchanan . : Hon John
 : . Buchanan Hon The John
 The John . Hon : Buchanan
 : Hon Buchanan John The .
 The Hon : . Buchanan John
 . Buchanan John Hon The :
 . Hon Buchanan John : The
 Hon John : The . Buchanan
 Hon The Buchanan : John .
 . John Hon : Buchanan The
 John : . The Buchanan Hon
 . John The : Buchanan Hon
 : The . Buchanan John Hon
 The : Buchanan . John Hon
 The Hon Buchanan . : John
 John Hon . Buchanan : The
There is no doubt about that. 
What you said basically is that it is up to Quebec to address its education problem and decide whether there will be guarantees of denominational education in the schools. 
You say it is a provincial problem. 
In my speech, I have said that there is no guarantee whatsoever that that is what will happen. 
But the right to dissentience that was guaranteed under section 93 of the Constitution will no longer be protected. 
The opinion of the Parti Québécois on this is known, and that is why it is a bit awkward.  
Senator Grafstein :
There are two parts to my honourable friend's question.  
I say, "Yes."  
Once we pass this amendment, it will be for the province of Quebec and those in the Province of Quebec to decide their educational architecture.  
I should like the province of Alberta to do things the way we do them in Ontario. 
Fat chance when it comes to education! 
Honourable senators, I think we have fulfilled our constitutional responsibilities if each senator is individually satisfied that a reasonable test of the majority of the minorities has been achieved. 
Under the evidence presented to us - not outside the room, but before us - that was clear. 
In that respect, I support the report and the resolution.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
It was moved by the Honourable Senator Pépin, seconded by the Honourable Senator Lucier, that this report be adopted.  
Is it your pleasure, honourable senators, to adopt the motion?  
Motion agreed to and report adopted, on division.  
Quebec 
 The . John Buchanan :
 The Buchanan Hon : John
 Hon . Buchanan The :
 John Buchanan Hon : .
Honourable senators, I should like to say a few words about Pietro Rizzuto.  
 words should Honourable senators Rizzuto . about say I to a like Pietro , few
 about say , I few to senators words should . Rizzuto Pietro like Honourable a
 to I senators should words say . Honourable few like a Pietro , about Rizzuto
 to should , few Honourable words Rizzuto senators Pietro . I a like about say
 say . should , Honourable Rizzuto few I words Pietro to a senators like about
 like Pietro to Honourable should Rizzuto . few a say senators about I words ,
 few Rizzuto Pietro to I like Honourable , about should words a senators say .
 say to senators a . few words Pietro about Rizzuto should I Honourable , like
 Honourable I Pietro senators few about words say , a should . like to Rizzuto
 I should Honourable Pietro like . about say a to , senators few words Rizzuto
 like words few senators say to Pietro Honourable about Rizzuto . a I should ,
 few about Honourable like say I should a senators Rizzuto Pietro , to words .
 like should . I about say a , to Honourable few Pietro senators Rizzuto words
 Rizzuto Pietro a should about few like Honourable I say , senators to . words
 . Honourable a I few like to Rizzuto Pietro should words say about , senators
 should words a , Pietro few Rizzuto . I senators Honourable like about say to
I will defend my government, and my honourable friend will defend his.  
I will not delve too far into the OAS because there are other speakers who wish to deal with this issue over the next two weeks. 
Perhaps we, as senators, will be able to discuss this matter well into the new year, which I hope we do.  
Senator Gigantès :
You are reading from the wrong script.  
Senator Taylor :
It is obvious that my honourable friend does not have any notes.  
Senator Tkachuk :
I think I am getting to honourable senators opposite.  
I was told by the Honourable Senator Kirby that members opposite would only have one speaker on this issue. 
I have a feeling that we may hear from a few more senators after I and other senators point out some of the weaknesses in Bill C-2.  
Honourable senators, I would reiterate that this is not a pension program: this is a payroll tax! 
In the past, it harboured cheap loans for provinces, and it will harbour a $100-billion fund that will grow to a $1-trillion fund. 
Honourable senators, we will not need to pay the price. 
We will be long gone before the young people who starting out now, and who expect a pension plan when they grow old, will reap the benefits of what we sow today.  
Honourable senators on this side and honourable senators on the other side, I do not know why you would want to rush this bill. 
What is in it for you? 
What is in it for the Minister of Finance? 
What is in it for anyone to rush this bill through Parliament by December 19? 
No reasonable explanation has been given to me, and I am sure no reasonable explanation has been given to my honourable friends, other than the PMO, Mr. Goldenberg and Mr. Martin, telling you to pass this bill by December 19. 
 Honourable senators , I should like say a few words about Pietro Rizzuto .
 say to . I a Pietro senators words , Honourable about should few like
 say about , a words Honourable I like Pietro senators to . should Rizzuto
 to I Pietro Rizzuto about words . Honourable should , like a senators few
As has been said, he was very proud of his Italian roots. 
 said Italian has was , of he . very been As proud his roots
 he been his , Italian very roots of As was said has . proud
 proud been he of As has , roots his very Italian was . said
 was proud said he very , his As . of has roots Italian been
 been roots As proud , was has Italian said his of he very .
 his said very of Italian , has . roots As proud he been was
 of , proud Italian roots As . his said been has very he was
 was very his Italian , roots has said . been As proud he of
 roots been he was . As Italian , very said of has his proud
 . , of was roots has Italian said proud he As his been very
 been proud said . Italian his has very roots was As , of he
 been his , very As proud was he said of has Italian . roots
 . his As of proud been he roots was Italian said has , very
 he proud As his said has was very been of . Italian , roots
 of his very he , As said was Italian proud . roots been has
 Italian , very As was of been . he proud has his roots said
We had to bend imperfect tools to see whether they fit our minimum requirements. 
In my view, they did not fit our minimum requirements; they fit our reasonable requirements for constitutional amendment.  
Senator Wood :
Is it not true in the letter from the bishops of Quebec - the letter the honourable senator read - that they were in favour of repealing section 93? 
They questioned linguistic rights and suggested that denominational guarantees established by 107 be maintained. 
There was a caveat there that my honourable friend forgot to read.  
Senator Grafstein :
I find myself in great difficulty defending Roman Catholic theology let alone letters from Roman Catholic archbishops. 
I will leave it to each senator to come to his or her own conclusion on the testimony and on the letters, which are appended to the report.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Honourable senators, Senator Grafstein is quite right in stating that reform is needed. 
Actually, reform is well under way in Quebec. 
The new system, it seems, will be in place for the next school year. 
New linguistic boards will be set up. 
There will be some difficulties, but, overall, it is proceeding quite well.  
What linkage is there between the new school system in Quebec and the request to exempt Quebec from certain obligations of section 93? 
I do not see any.  
Senator Grafstein :
Honourable senators, there is constitutional law. 
Quebec wants to proceed by the rule of law. 
 As has been said , he was very of his Italian roots .
 . roots Italian very was has proud , been his As said he
 been As was has proud of Italian roots , his very . he
 proud Italian he has roots was , very said been his of .
I knew him, not through my relationship with him in the Senate, but through his relationship with the Italian communities of Cape Breton. 
 . with , the communities Italian with but through , my him in relationship through of Breton Senate his the him not relationship Cape I knew
 of I through . Italian but the through Breton knew relationship relationship , Senate , in my Cape him with with not his the him communities
 , my of with not through I through relationship him , in Breton . Italian with but the the relationship Cape him communities Senate knew his
 I Breton the Cape , knew through my relationship the him , not in with with but Italian Senate through . of relationship his communities him
 through in the him the through his , relationship Italian Cape knew Breton not relationship with Senate my . him I of communities , but with
 through communities through of him relationship . , knew with Italian the Cape , I relationship his Senate not my him but in with Breton the
 knew through through Italian Breton his not but him communities with of with Senate my the , him relationship . the I , Cape relationship in
 with with relationship through through communities of Italian relationship the Cape my not him his I , , Breton him in . Senate but knew the
 with Italian through him through Senate , communities his , I Breton in relationship the Cape my him . the relationship of but with knew not
 my Breton the through with relationship communities relationship him , through him but Senate in Cape with the Italian not of knew his I . ,
 . Breton knew my communities with , through relationship with him relationship through Italian the Cape his not the but in him Senate , of I
 my with Italian but him relationship knew of communities with . through Senate his in , him Breton not I Cape through , the relationship the
 Cape Italian communities him his relationship with with Senate . of , in the my Breton but knew not him relationship I , through the through
 Senate with through relationship knew Cape of . communities , his Breton my relationship through him with but , in him I the not the Italian
 , with my knew through relationship his communities in Italian . relationship of him Senate Breton , through but the with Cape not I him the
 relationship through communities in relationship Italian his Breton knew not of . with Senate , through with my him the him the but Cape I ,
Rather, their interest was focused on the failure of section 23(1)( a ) of the Charter to be proclaimed in Quebec. 
As Senator Lynch-Staunton put it so well, it means that there are in effect two classes in Quebec as it presently pertains. 
If you are English speaking and you come from outside of Canada, your children will be streamed by the Quebec government into the French-language stream. 
That is unfair. 
They are not without some type of relief and I will address that later.  
However, this is an issue of linguistic rights. 
Here the question is not of linguistic rights but denominational privileges.  
In cross-examining Alliance Quebec, it was clear that they did not oppose the amendments to section 93 but rather the enforcement of section 23(1)( a ). Section 23(1)( a ) requires a proclamation by the Province of Quebec, and a declaration of this proclamation is, of course, not within federal powers. 
We gave that up in 1982.  
Senator Pitfield knows this well. 
He was an architect of the Constitution Act, 1982. 
It is clearly within the four corners of the assembly of Quebec to proclaim, if it chooses, section 23(1)( a ). Many of us are unhappy with this aspect of section 23(1)( a ). Students in over 13,000 families have been precluded from entering the English stream because the Province of Quebec has refused to proclaim section 23(1)( a ). 
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Who put it in?  
Senator Grafstein :
Rather, they wished to use this opportunity to leverage the Government of Quebec to proclaim section 23(1)( a ). This the Quebec government was clearly not prepared to do.  
The second group, the aboriginal groups within Quebec, claimed that this resolution detrimentally affected their rights. 
The report makes clear - and we came to this conclusion aided and abetted by legal advice and statements by both Quebec and federal ministers - that aboriginal rights were in no way, shape or form, affected by this resolution. 
We said so in the report.  
This left two groups, small but important, who claim to be detrimentally affected. 
 I knew him , not through my relationship with him in the Senate but through his relationship with the Italian communities of Cape Breton .
 relationship Italian the Cape with his not through knew Senate , , him relationship in of with I him the Breton my . but communities
 knew Cape through with relationship communities in Breton Italian him , with . , relationship Senate the my not him his I but the through
 with relationship Italian communities Cape him relationship my not with in , his but him Breton through Senate , knew through the of . the
Way back in 1980, the provincial government had a banquet at the UCCB in Cape Breton, and we had a ceremony marking the first trans-Atlantic wireless message from North America to Europe which was sent from Table Head in Glace Bay to Europe.  
 which the had wireless Cape Bay marking government Head provincial back we Table ceremony Breton in the from a message to was in to in Europe - Atlantic and North America Europe , banquet a trans . , first 1980 had from UCCB at Glace sent the Way
 which in to wireless back in ceremony in first Atlantic from message at Way - Breton , had trans America marking we Bay Europe had 1980 to Cape a North provincial a Glace sent UCCB banquet the government from was the and . Table Europe , the Head
 had message Way , the North - Atlantic Glace marking in we and Breton Table from which had at , was UCCB ceremony 1980 from Cape wireless Head to Europe Bay the provincial a sent government a banquet the Europe to first back America . in trans in
 which the had had ceremony in from back a . government North Breton - Europe the in to banquet we Atlantic , sent marking to trans Way Bay and Europe at , 1980 wireless message UCCB Glace the America from Table in was provincial Cape Head first a
 trans from Europe sent - Head in Glace , had . Bay Cape was Way Breton banquet message Europe , back first in provincial Table at a the North America the we and the 1980 to UCCB to wireless ceremony which from in Atlantic a government had marking
 Head in banquet had a from we Breton UCCB Cape North Europe Atlantic Way , from in back in sent Bay wireless 1980 the to had government Table message - . provincial trans Glace to and ceremony was the at the which first America marking Europe a ,
 wireless Europe in and first sent Cape Head Glace marking at had in the back North from America Bay government ceremony a . we , Table in , the from to Atlantic 1980 a Europe to - the Way provincial Breton message had was UCCB banquet trans which
 was marking Way from and , 1980 first had North sent , to America the . back we Glace in Breton Table banquet government at Atlantic ceremony trans wireless in had the UCCB a message a - Europe Europe in Head Bay from Cape which to the provincial
 had , in , first had the and to message a Table which from America the was sent marking Cape from trans Europe back in Way Atlantic Breton - Europe Bay UCCB to North in ceremony banquet Glace wireless government Head we provincial the a . at 1980
 provincial Europe 1980 had Bay trans America . at ceremony Head first to a we message Cape North marking in the Table to wireless the Glace was from from back Europe and UCCB sent in Atlantic , had in the Way government , a which Breton banquet -
 in in the Way Atlantic UCCB which Cape provincial and the Glace . trans marking to Europe at 1980 ceremony first a - a from Europe in was wireless Breton , message from to North we had banquet sent America government back Bay the Head Table had ,
 which in America banquet first to . and a in - Way Cape in Table Europe a , provincial , government had trans 1980 UCCB Head had Atlantic back Breton message was from North the Bay we the wireless sent ceremony from marking to Europe at the Glace
 a UCCB to a government had was the Bay North banquet first - , in America the Atlantic and trans Europe 1980 at which Cape we Europe sent Breton in message Glace had from Head wireless to provincial Table ceremony back from , . Way in the marking
 in Glace at America was Bay Table in ceremony first trans to a . message had Cape the banquet Head , from the 1980 Europe and marking which Europe sent Way Atlantic back , - in a North we had the government UCCB provincial to from Breton wireless
 a first and Europe which had trans sent to Head we message the to Glace North , government in Atlantic banquet back . UCCB marking Table had , 1980 provincial from in wireless Way - was a at in from the Europe America Cape Breton Bay the ceremony
 Table provincial in the from a trans had back first Atlantic Cape was to Head which ceremony we Europe marking and banquet in Bay government at UCCB North , , sent the 1980 a Way wireless . from the message had to Breton Europe Glace America - in
Yes. 
While I am doing that, I should like to remind the honourable senator that even before the federal government balances the books, it is putting more money into transfers to the provinces. 
In fact, the government is raising the cash floor from $11 billion to $12.5 billion, the single largest reinvestment made by the federal government. 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Provinces-Effect on Atlantic Provinces 
Hon. Mabel M. DeWare :
Honourable senators, my figures show that, four years ago, the provinces received more than $19 billion in cash transfers for health, education and welfare through what was then known as the Canadian Assistance Program and Established Programs Financing. 
The government's math provides some good news, as the original plan was to give them even less.  
The problem is that some provinces will get less under the new scheme while others will get more. 
Indeed, seven of the ten provinces will actually see their cash transfers fall even further, including all of Atlantic Canada.  
The cash transfer to Nova Scotia will fall from $427 million to $411 million, which is a difference of $16 million. 
The transfer for Prince Edward Island will fall from $60 million to $59 million, which is a reduction of $1 million. 
The cash transfer to Newfoundland will fall from $281 million to $251 million, which is a difference of $30 million. 
New Brunswick will lose $11 million. 
The total loss to the Atlantic provinces is $58 million.  
At the same time, three provinces, Ontario, Alberta and British Columbia will see their cash payments actually rise. 
Atlantic Canada's loss is their gain.  
Can the Leader of the Government tell us if his government believes that it is fair to ask the provinces that can least afford it to continue to receive less money year after year by way of support for health, education and social assistance?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
I thank the honourable Senator DeWare for doing the mathematics for me. 
I only wish I had done it myself prior to coming into the Senate today. 
 Way back in 1980 , the provincial government had a banquet at the UCCB Cape Breton , and we had a ceremony marking the first trans - Atlantic wireless message from North America to Europe which was sent from Table Head in Glace Bay to Europe .
 had - which Europe at message first to provincial banquet ceremony Table wireless , back Cape and we marking the trans Way from Glace North sent had in a . America Europe from the 1980 Head Breton , Atlantic was in UCCB in a the to Bay
 the marking 1980 from Table UCCB to Head Glace banquet provincial which from in ceremony the , , sent was - back Europe America we in North trans a in Bay Breton Cape Europe Way . the had first to a and Atlantic government at message had
 government Table we a the first Head had Europe provincial Glace Cape , message in ceremony 1980 from banquet and in sent to UCCB a America Bay back the , Breton trans the North marking in - Europe was to had which Way from at wireless .
Present at that ceremony - I remember it so well - were Governor General Ed Schreyer and his wife Lily; myself and my wife; Leno Pologato, who was president of the Italian Association of Cape Breton and lived in the first Italian community of Canada, in Dominion, where Senator Graham is from; and a captain of an Italian battleship that had come over to be at this big event. 
 and of Cape Pologato wife Italian at Schreyer in and is of . I the president , Senator who that and my the Canada captain this ceremony Present Dominion , Leno General in had from , at lived event myself that his where ; remember Italian of ; ; a of battleship an it big and Ed to were Lily so Breton well be Governor wife - over was Italian - first Association Graham community come
 ; Schreyer Italian it Canada Association , Governor the - of president I an General Breton were wife remember lived that Lily and at battleship ceremony captain - had over come big Ed Graham of of so was who . is , ; Senator and Pologato the Cape my that community a ; , to Leno where Italian this from and first wife event and Present myself of be at Dominion in well Italian his in
 Lily the of - Pologato and where that wife remember it to Present big community in Ed were wife Schreyer an first Leno Italian , is of my of Italian this be , well president I captain at his so Association and at come of in myself Senator Breton and ; Dominion who a ceremony - , Governor was from and Cape that Italian lived General Canada ; the . battleship event had Graham ; over
 his had Senator Italian , Cape of Canada battleship - and myself ; event captain of , Pologato from Schreyer a remember is at to Governor president Dominion over come . Graham at community it and Italian Italian ceremony in big an Association first Lily ; were my and was - ; Ed of I Present wife the lived be and well so Leno General this the wife , of Breton that where who that in
 was at remember were president Italian - Graham first it Leno event who and Cape well in to this I - battleship wife that of Italian had the Breton General wife of over where , of Present Lily his in my Association an that and Governor be Ed , ; big a of at ceremony ; Dominion the Schreyer community Pologato Italian and from , Canada is Senator myself and ; so . captain come lived
 and come who at Present a , it community Schreyer had I Graham be of Governor in Association from Italian was ceremony and of well in battleship Pologato event an captain wife Italian lived ; and that president wife is remember General Leno were big the my at first to Lily - his this Cape of , - that of Ed where . Breton the Senator over Italian myself , Canada and so ; ; Dominion
 from were be first ; battleship where to that had come wife Senator and community Leno lived , myself captain his this Present - Lily , of , the is Ed in Italian wife the so Schreyer remember it and Breton event of Italian at Canada I Cape . and of who at was Pologato ceremony big Graham president my well a ; that in ; Governor of and General - Italian Dominion an Association over
 Breton Lily captain his at Present Italian , in that Italian at big it Leno Ed of Governor Association , well that first and Canada wife of General this Senator my Pologato Graham Cape of so from and myself - of and to Italian had battleship I where remember be a president were ceremony was is . come and Dominion wife , ; ; who in - event the community Schreyer an ; the lived over
 his my that at Cape the Italian big were Ed of is community of in ; Leno , Dominion who . come the this and Italian General at remember , ceremony to Senator an had Graham - of Pologato I and Lily so myself from Italian ; in and was Canada of ; be , wife well where battleship first lived wife Present captain and Breton president Association Governor it Schreyer - a over event that
 . Italian Schreyer come is , ceremony at his ; was Dominion I of in , Lily first wife remember Breton in of Leno ; and - of Cape and from it the , this lived Present captain big so Canada Governor and had Ed Italian ; wife my Association Senator who be well a General the Graham event to were battleship Italian of over where at Pologato that an - community that and myself president
 this lived ; in it of ceremony and of the myself Italian who well Present , Breton his that is wife Italian my were and I so where Ed that wife was , of Canada Senator - had and and a Italian Association Cape . Governor ; General an battleship in of Schreyer Dominion , to the at - come captain event remember Pologato at Lily president big Leno first from be Graham community over ;
 of first be battleship the event was an at is a Italian of and myself of ; where Ed the Association Cape his and Pologato Italian that wife Lily - that and my Breton . this I Canada it ; Dominion from , ceremony , in big who Leno community Governor over - captain lived Graham wife and remember at were ; Senator president Schreyer Italian so well to of in , had General come Present
 Italian Breton and of Schreyer Senator where of remember I , over in had first Italian Dominion Graham . a from Governor ceremony the is that - myself ; ; wife this Canada captain big lived who General to be his come president Ed at community Lily so the and Present battleship and my at it , - Association Italian Leno Pologato and in of Cape event of wife , an was were ; that well
 had Lily Leno it wife captain Ed so well of Italian . over Canada community Association lived myself at come Cape his - Pologato from president and where remember - Dominion Graham wife Italian the , my General first in Italian were in Governor Senator this , ceremony event of who at a that ; of that and Breton an of Schreyer Present ; to and was the and is be I , ; battleship big
 I Ed his and Italian Senator my where over a who Leno , Italian at first ; and captain remember from it of had and that to Breton this . ceremony be Schreyer wife Italian so , and Cape the lived - is come that of an Present Governor of Pologato the were ; big in Dominion ; Canada of wife well Graham Association community battleship president Lily at General was , event in - myself
 in from and of General Schreyer - wife of remember I be Leno Dominion the ; so Present myself had it well of Ed where Breton of Canada Italian an a first is Cape . and Italian to captain come Senator was and , Governor community and this his at big at that - lived wife Pologato over my Association , Italian the that ; Lily ; were in ceremony event battleship president , Graham who
Bear in mind that this minister is a separatist. 
I repeat what he said: 
This is what we have always said.  
Mr. Chrétien has acknowledged that the federal government would negotiate. 
Could the Leader of the Government in the Senate tell us under what authority the Prime Minister could negotiate?  
Senator Graham :
The Prime Minister would be negotiating on behalf of Canadians, but recognizing at the same time that nine other provinces and the territories are involved. 
I am sure the Prime Minister would take all of that into consideration.  
Senator Nolin :
The Supreme Court received the request from your government to decide on the issue of Quebec's secession. 
We will learn in all likelihood from the Supreme Court that the amending formula would be appropriate if Canadians agreed to allow one province to separate from the others. 
Have the Prime Minister, the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs or officials of your government had formal or informal discussions on this matter with the representatives of the nine other provinces?  
Senator Graham :
Not that I am aware, honourable senators. 
We are aware, of course, of the meetings that took place with the premiers in Calgary. 
We know there is a first ministers' conference later this week in Ottawa, at which this matter may or may not arise. 
However, I am not aware that there have been discussions, either formal or informal, between the Prime Minister and the premiers up to this point in time.  
Immigration 
Tracking and Detention of Unsuccessful Refugee Claimants-Government Position 
Hon. Donald H. Oliver :
 Present at that ceremony - I remember it so well - were Governor General Ed Schreyer and his wife Lily myself and my wife ; Leno Pologato , who was president of the Italian Association of Cape Breton and lived in the first Italian community of Canada , in Dominion , where Senator Graham is from ; and a captain of an Italian battleship that had come over to be at this big event .
 and , myself an - Italian Dominion in big community come Italian Ed Pologato that Cape where over Present to General Leno at ; the event captain , Association is Canada my Lily I of of Governor it ceremony and from a wife was well Italian this Graham and who the president his ; be wife of . ; that Schreyer in battleship at , Breton Senator of - and first were so had remember
 Senator lived and Ed of had is over a big well his , to ; Graham event , and who Dominion were myself community Italian was the that my Italian where so that - it at Lily and General - Canada at be Present ; in Schreyer Pologato come Governor of wife captain Cape president ceremony ; remember Association , in Breton Leno of of . this battleship from an the and Italian first I
 first I an Association remember , this Ed Breton - at Pologato Canada that my to from had was of and his so the Dominion president well the in Senator in Lily , Leno where Italian of of a ; , and captain were it Graham and . Italian be myself battleship Present of Governor ; is come lived who - at big ; that Italian General community wife over Cape ceremony Schreyer wife event
We held a reception aboard that battleship in Sydney Harbour. 
 battleship held Sydney in . a We aboard reception that Harbour
 reception held Harbour in Sydney aboard We battleship a . that
 aboard Sydney reception a Harbour held We battleship . that in
 . Harbour held We Sydney aboard a that reception battleship in
 battleship that a held reception We Sydney Harbour . aboard in
 We in Sydney reception Harbour a aboard . held battleship that
 We held a that aboard in Harbour Sydney . reception battleship
 a aboard We battleship that in Sydney . Harbour reception held
 Harbour We that a battleship Sydney . aboard in held reception
 held a Harbour Sydney in aboard that We . battleship reception
 aboard held Sydney Harbour in reception a that We . battleship
 held that battleship Sydney in a We . reception aboard Harbour
 We in . that Sydney a held aboard reception Harbour battleship
 aboard reception Harbour held Sydney that . battleship We a in
 battleship held aboard We . in that Sydney reception a Harbour
 reception battleship . that a held Harbour Sydney in aboard We
We are talking about an annual amount on the order of 15 per cent to 20 per cent of Canada's gross national product. 
It is an enormous amount. 
I therefore think there has to be some sort of accountability, and one of the ways to achieve that is for parliamentarians to be involved in drafting the Auditor General's report; in my view, there should be an amendment along these lines, to guarantee that that is the case.  
Hon. Jerahmiel S. Grafstein :
Honourable senators, I have a brief question for Senator Bolduc. 
I believe the Caisse de Dépôt is the most powerful pension fund in Canada. 
What accountability does that fund have to the Canadian public?  
Senator Bolduc :
It has not very much accountability to the Canadian public. 
This has been discussed many times in Quebec City and last year, for the first time, they appeared before a parliamentary committee. 
This is a serious matter.  
Senator Grafstein :
Honourable senators, I do not question the issue of accountability. 
The problem is whether one would be able to obtain the very best people by the public process, the newspaper process or the media process, or whether the accountability process is better when governments, which are indirectly accountable, make those appointments and those nominated are then accountable to a parliamentary committee.  
Senator Bolduc :
When you talk about "accountability," I would suggest that that is second best. 
It is not a perfect situation, although you will have a parliamentary committee taking some responsibility. 
It is better than nothing but, in my opinion, it is second best.  
I am fairly sure that, in one way, the pure accountability we are talking about is quasi-impossible. 
Have different people manage different funds so that we will have some evaluation, some comparison and some diversification.  
 We held a reception aboard battleship in Sydney Harbour .
 Sydney in aboard We Harbour that battleship . held a
 that Sydney in battleship held aboard We . a Harbour
 We battleship Harbour Sydney held a that in aboard .
Of course, there were many others present, but the one that I remember most was Senator Pietro Rizzuto, whom I had never met before. 
 before Of many . I there that remember was , others never , present had whom but the course , Pietro were Senator one Rizzuto most met I
 Pietro whom present that were remember never , Senator was I I one most , but . Of before Rizzuto , met many course others had there the
 before had , there others I but one many course present . most Pietro never Of was whom , were Rizzuto that remember the , met I Senator
 whom was , present most Rizzuto but Senator others many course . were that never remember had before there Of one met Pietro , I I the ,
 one Rizzuto met course others Senator there that , remember I the most Pietro many whom Of had before were never was , , present I . but
 remember that one Of Rizzuto the most , . course whom I many I were had was Pietro met Senator others but before , , there present never
 the never Senator whom , there many one . had was Rizzuto were before I but , met course that , remember Pietro Of others most present I
 , Of others , most had never the remember I that were many , there . met before Senator but whom course one was Rizzuto Pietro present I
 course others I the I were Rizzuto there one . never had present met Of before was many Pietro that remember Senator , but , whom , most
 Pietro . there but I Rizzuto I present that was met whom , , had most many were one , the Of others Senator before course never remember
 there had Of , others Rizzuto whom was but , before that present I the many . Senator , met Pietro remember were most course I one never
 met , , were Pietro had course the others , Senator never Rizzuto but I there was that remember many most Of . before whom present I one
 was were before present never the others whom one , course that but there most remember I Rizzuto Pietro I many met , . had Of , Senator
 that . met whom one Pietro never most Of before present had there was the Senator , many , were I but , others course remember I Rizzuto
 that one but Of , remember present course I others before I , . never , met was many Senator Rizzuto were there most the Pietro had whom
 , was remember whom there were Rizzuto , the met one had never others course , that Senator present before I Pietro most I Of many . but
My experience tells me and I can tell you that it is going to be complicated.  
Hon. Terry Stratton :
Honourable senators, I should like participate in the debate on Bill C-2, the Canada Pension Plan.  
They were informed; and they could understand the information they were being given.  
At the end of every television interview, the finance minister reiterated that, if they did not like the private sector pension plan, they could stick with the public sector pension plan. 
He did this all the way through, for months, until it came time for the people to decide which plan they wanted.  
Within the first six weeks, 25 per cent of the public were in the private pension plan. 
Today, 90 per cent of the public are in the private pension plan, and that plan is doing extremely well. 
Despite the crisis with the Mexican peso, which involves their next door neighbour, their equity market survived, and is, in fact, doing well. 
Investors are getting good returns.  
Two lessons are to be learned from that. 
First, a communication plan on the part of the government can sell a fund that is fundamentally sound; and, second, a private pension plan can work.  
Honourable senators, we will have a private pension plan in this country within 10 years, because those "generation X" kids will demand it from us. 
The "excess generation," as the article calls you and I, will have no say in the matter.  
My fundamental point is that there must be a communications plan.  
This bill is seen by many people across the country as nothing more than another tax grab by the Liberal government, a tax grab in the range of $100 billion. 
Imagine bringing in a bill of such magnitude without giving Canadians the opportunity to have input into such dramatic changes to their retirement system as we know it, changes which will dramatically change the three pillars of our pension system, OAS, GIS, and the Canada Pension Plan.  
As I noted in a question to the Leader of the Government in the Senate on October 30: 
My question pertains not to the proposed changes to the Canada Pension Plan but to the government's efforts to sell those changes to Canadians. 
Can the minister report on what the government has spent and what will be spent in the future for communications concerning the Canada Pension Plan, including polling, focus groups, communications, advice and strategy and advertising?  
 Of course , were many others present , but the one that I remember most was Senator Pietro Rizzuto , whom I had never met before .
 many whom were but , Of had remember I one Rizzuto was others . there Pietro that , , present course before the never most Senator met
 there Of course that met most Senator before had one whom . I , never remember Rizzuto were present but Pietro the was many , , others
 Rizzuto , , others most there Of the one that . had but were Pietro before Senator remember whom many was met I course never present ,
He was there representing the Italian communities of Canada and for his fellow countryman Guglielmo Marconi. 
 communities was his Guglielmo Marconi fellow there He Italian . representing the for and countryman of Canada
 fellow Canada for Marconi of Guglielmo communities there Italian He and was countryman the . representing his
 . Guglielmo Italian for representing Marconi fellow was He of there Canada and countryman the his communities
 there of Guglielmo was the Italian . his and fellow He communities Canada for countryman representing Marconi
 communities He the was Canada representing there for countryman his Guglielmo Marconi fellow Italian and . of
 the representing fellow of countryman was Italian He Marconi Guglielmo there Canada . his communities and for
 countryman and Guglielmo fellow Italian for the there He of communities was Canada representing his . Marconi
 representing of He was Canada for fellow countryman the and there . Italian Marconi communities his Guglielmo
 countryman of . and Italian Canada representing He his fellow for communities Marconi there Guglielmo was the
 was Italian of representing his . communities for Guglielmo there countryman fellow He Canada Marconi the and
 communities the was He fellow countryman Canada Italian Guglielmo . Marconi representing there and his of for
 Canada the for Guglielmo fellow of there He representing his Italian countryman was Marconi and . communities
 Marconi Italian for Canada of communities Guglielmo the . there his He representing and was countryman fellow
 representing . fellow his Italian and He countryman there Canada Marconi Guglielmo communities of the for was
 and fellow . there communities countryman Italian his the for Guglielmo Marconi representing He of Canada was
 Italian the of representing for communities his countryman . fellow Marconi Guglielmo He Canada and was there
The time frames in the hearings in no way diminished the committee's ability to obtain or weigh the evidence. 
The committee made a thorough investigation of that evidence. 
No point of view went unexamined, save for one raised by the Reform Party at the last minute, and I will deal with that later.  
Let me for a moment repeat what we heard. 
There was a unanimous resolution, save for two abstentions, from the Quebec assembly. 
We heard from the opposition in the assembly; the Quebec government itself; English and French school boards; Catholic, Protestant and other teachers' groups; archbishops of the Roman Catholic church and the Anglican archbishop of Quebec, which I will deal with later; minority groups including Jewish, Arab, non-Roman Catholic and other allophone groups; students groups, both English and French. 
All agreed that linguistic school boards, which were a direct consequence of this amendment, were desirable and progressive.  
There was some dissent. 
I will briefly touch on it, as did Senator Bolduc in his most insightful speech, especially with respect to the plight of certain French-speaking Protestants and certain English-speaking Catholics. 
There is no question at all that some in those groups feel detrimentally affected.  
Again, under the current Quebec law 109, the notwithstanding clauses had been included, both with respect to the Quebec Charter and the federal Charter of Rights and Freedoms, therefore allowing for denominational teaching to be continued in Quebec. 
How the Quebec government will ultimately continue to afford opportunities for denominational teaching is a much more difficult question to predict. 
However, it is clear to me, from all the evidence I heard and carefully cross-examined, that the majorities of the so-called minorities favoured this change. 
There appeared to be some exceptions at the outset that must be addressed.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, I regret to interrupt but the allotted 15 minutes has expired. 
Is leave granted for Senator Grafstein to continue?  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
Senator Grafstein :
 He was there representing the Italian communities of Canada and for his fellow countryman Marconi .
 communities for and his He countryman the Marconi . there Guglielmo Italian of was Canada fellow
 countryman his the He of Italian fellow there . Canada was for communities and Guglielmo representing
 Canada representing his Guglielmo fellow and for Italian countryman was the communities . there of Marconi
Present also was Marconi's daughter, Mrs. Marconi-Braga, who was living in New Jersey at the time. 
 was time daughter the Present , ' in New . living at - was , Mrs Braga s also . Jersey Marconi Marconi who
 s in at was - living . Marconi Present was daughter Jersey , Braga . , time New who the Mrs Marconi also '
 New at the was daughter , Marconi . time Braga , Present Marconi Jersey s . in - living was Mrs ' who also
 was daughter - Jersey . Marconi Present Mrs s ' New who . Marconi also , Braga at time , the living was in
 s . who in time Braga Mrs was was - daughter , . living Jersey the at ' also Present Marconi Marconi New ,
 New living Jersey also at . who in , was Mrs the , was time Braga s Present . - Marconi ' Marconi daughter
 s Jersey , also who ' Braga Marconi Present in the . Mrs at . - daughter was living Marconi , was time New
 also Jersey ' s daughter was the . in . living Mrs was , at Present Marconi who - , Marconi New time Braga
 living . daughter , New at - , ' Marconi was time Jersey the also Present Mrs Marconi in . was who Braga s
 living Mrs Marconi daughter Jersey time in . was also the - New , s Present Marconi Braga at was who ' . ,
 , in . s also at Present who Marconi was - . time Braga Mrs , daughter New was the ' Marconi living Jersey
 at , daughter Braga New Mrs living s also time Marconi . Jersey Marconi . the - , ' Present was in was who
 . Jersey the Present in Mrs , daughter ' who time Marconi was at was living s - New Braga . also , Marconi
 Braga , daughter at time - Present the New . Marconi was was also , Jersey in s . Mrs Marconi who ' living
 ' Present the Braga - Mrs also in Jersey . s Marconi who time daughter at . was Marconi living was , , New
 was also living . Marconi in time ' - s Marconi daughter who . Jersey Mrs at Braga the , , Present was New
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Concept of Differing Targets-Government Position 
National Unity 
Recent Remarks of Prime Minister-Possible Conditions of Secession of Quebec-Government Position 
Immigration 
Tracking and Detention of Unsuccessful Refugee Claimants-Government Position 
Detention Facilities for Refugee Claimants-Request for Particulars 
Fisheries and Oceans 
Negotiations on Multilateral Agreement on Investment-Continuation of Limit on Foreign Ownership of Commercial Licences-Government Position 
National Defence 
Search and Rescue Helicopter Replacement Program-Possible Cabinet Discussion on Awarding Contract for Helicopter Purchase-Government Position 
Search and Rescue Helicopter Replacement Program-State of Sea King Helicopter Fleet-Government Position 
Federal-Provincial Relations 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Atlantic Provinces Equal to Increase in Social Transfers-Government Position 
Delayed Answers to Oral Questions 
Human Resources Development 
Changes to Canada Pension Plan-Accountability and Transparency of Investment Board-Undertaking to Publish Quarterly Financial Statements-Government Position 
Changes to Canada Pension Plan-Investment Board Not Subject to Access to Information Act-Government Position 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
Commemoration of Fiftieth Anniversary-Plans of Government 
Activities planned around December 10, 1997 for the launch of the 50th Anniversary commemorative year of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) 
 Present also was Marconi ' s daughter , Mrs . Marconi - Braga , who was living in New Jersey at time .
 who living , was Braga , Jersey . . in daughter - ' New Marconi the time Mrs Marconi at also s was
 Mrs time Marconi - s daughter Present was was the at New . ' also in who Braga living Jersey . , ,
 Present Braga daughter also in s . , . at Mrs - time the was Marconi who living ' Jersey , was New
We had a wonderful afternoon and a tremendous banquet.  
 and had a banquet a . tremendous wonderful afternoon We
 banquet tremendous wonderful . a had We afternoon and a
 . a had banquet tremendous afternoon We and a wonderful
 banquet wonderful We afternoon tremendous a and a . had
 wonderful . and a tremendous We afternoon a had banquet
 a wonderful had a and tremendous We . afternoon banquet
 a afternoon had banquet a tremendous We . and wonderful
 . afternoon and We tremendous had banquet a wonderful a
 afternoon a had wonderful tremendous . We a and banquet
 afternoon had a wonderful a banquet . tremendous and We
 a a tremendous afternoon . banquet We had wonderful and
 . a afternoon and We a wonderful banquet had tremendous
 tremendous and a had afternoon We wonderful . a banquet
 had afternoon and a banquet wonderful . tremendous a We
 had wonderful . banquet tremendous We and a afternoon a
 a afternoon . had We banquet and a wonderful tremendous
Is it your pleasure, honourable senators, to adopt the motion?  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
Motion agreed to.  
The Senate 
Conduct of Business-Notice of Inquiry 
Hon. William M. Kelly :
Honourable senators, I give notice: 
That on Thursday next, December 11, 1997, I will call the attention of the Senate to the way in which the Senate conducts its business.  
QUESTION PERIOD 
Federal-Provincial Relations 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Province of Quebec-Request for Particulars 
Hon. Fernand Roberge :
Honourable senators, my question follows the announcement made yesterday regarding the government's decision to set at $12.5 billion the cash floor for transfer payments made under the Canada health and social transfer (CHST). 
The government would have us believe that this amount represents an increase in health care payments. 
However, the figures indicate otherwise.  
The following year, in 1999-2000, they will only be $3.748 billion. 
Yet, the government claimed yesterday that it was implementing a stable transfer system. 
In fact, cash payments paid to Quebec for health and education will be reduced by over $300 million over a five-year period. 
Honourable senators, I remind you that these cuts are in addition to this year's reduction of $700 million compared to last year. 
 We had wonderful afternoon and a tremendous banquet .
 banquet We wonderful tremendous had a a . afternoon
 a afternoon and tremendous banquet We . wonderful a
 a tremendous had wonderful . and a banquet afternoon
I sat next to him at the banquet. 
 at him sat to the . banquet I next
 him . sat banquet at the I next to
 the to I at . sat him banquet next
 banquet . sat I next to the at him
 sat next the to banquet him . I at
 . the banquet him I at to sat next
 to . the sat him I at banquet next
 . at banquet sat the next I to him
 to . banquet sat the him at I next
 sat . at him banquet the I next to
 at the next . him sat I banquet to
 . I sat to banquet the him next at
 to the . sat him I at banquet next
 . the next banquet sat at him I to
 to I next . banquet him sat the at
 . sat banquet I the him next at to
Energy-Department of Justice-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Energy-Department of Multiculturalism-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Energy-Department of Natural Resources-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Defence-Status of Clothe the Soldier Project 
Defence-Status of the Armoured Personnel Carrier Replacement Program 
Business of the Senate 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
Second Reading-Debate Continued 
Canada Cooperatives Bill 
First Reading 
Criminal Code 
Interpretation Act 
Bill to Amend-Second Reading-Motions in Amendment-Debate Adjourned to Await Ruling of Speaker 
Motion in Sub-Amendment 
Quebec 
Linguistic School Boards-Amendment to Section 93 of Constitution-Report of Special Joint Committee Adopted 
Quebec 
Linguistic School Boards-Motion to Amend Section 93 of Constitution-Debate Adjourned 
Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration 
Sixth Report of Committee Adopted 
 I sat next to him at the .
 I . the sat at to banquet next
 I banquet him . sat next to the
 banquet . at next the to him I
I found him a most interesting individual on that occasion.  
 individual found most I interesting on occasion that a him .
 . that individual occasion him I interesting found on most a
 I interesting a individual most found occasion . him that on
 I on him individual found most . a interesting that occasion
 most that a interesting occasion . I found on individual him
 occasion most interesting a I . him on that individual found
 most found on I interesting a him . individual that occasion
 occasion I found on him interesting . individual a that most
 found him on that interesting I a most occasion individual .
 found interesting I a that him occasion . most individual on
 occasion him . that on a I interesting found most individual
 him a on individual occasion most that I interesting . found
 a interesting on occasion found . I that most him individual
 . found I a most that occasion on individual him interesting
 found individual that . occasion a I on most him interesting
 a I found on . most him occasion individual interesting that
Some damage is done every day. 
But it is the private sector. 
What you are doing with this bill is giving enormous powers to a few people with money belonging to all Canadians, particularly the poor. 
It is serious because we do not know how long this will last. 
Bills at second reading are always good measures. 
I saw more than my share in 40 years. 
Ministers come up with their legislation and they promise miracles. 
Three years later we take stock and discover that things are not like they were supposed to be. 
The minister's comments do not have nearly the same impact after three years.  
I am not saying everything is managed perfectly in the private sector, but I will tell you that it is the people's own money. 
It is not public money. 
No one is forced to invest in Royal Trust.  
Senator Gigantès :
The public is made up of individuals. 
These individuals are private persons. 
Under the proposed system, they would invest in something which may not make huge profits, but which will not experience the disasters of the private sector.  
Senator Bolduc :
It is a matter of choice. 
Senator Gigantès :
With a system such as the one proposed, one thing is for sure. 
 I found him a most interesting individual on that .
 I . a most occasion on him individual found that
 on interesting I . most occasion individual that him found
 interesting found individual him on occasion a that I most
One of the things I remember also was that we had arranged a telecommunications-television hook-up with the presidential palace in Rome, and Governor General Schreyer spoke to the President of Italy, even though at that time it was about two o'clock in the morning in Italy. 
 Schreyer in the that of General about the things Italy though palace in was presidential two we I up a Italy time even and , , remember hook was in the clock telecommunications had television the arranged with at also President One . morning spoke Governor of - it to ' - Rome that o
 , up things President even Italy with the palace two . Governor the - ' in also and - the of that General arranged Rome the hook it television to at One we remember was , clock in spoke Schreyer that was I telecommunications o about though had presidential Italy time a of in morning
 hook morning the Schreyer that presidential - time up Governor things Italy television even spoke was - also palace the in arranged a with of was in of at had the , it One we the I though and Rome in General clock two that to about . President ' Italy o , remember telecommunications
 ' had . time - the about One of the was Italy - to that television in up it Schreyer Rome of with General palace also spoke at the in and in hook things I Italy clock was presidential Governor , two even a President , o the that remember arranged telecommunications we morning though
 had time things was about it in in I we palace even presidential was morning General Schreyer also the that hook arranged , with television telecommunications the One a Rome in President remember - to that , two Italy - clock the of up the ' at o Governor and of spoke . though Italy
 two at presidential was we a in things time though the Schreyer television the was to with General Rome that the arranged clock about - telecommunications Governor the that and up Italy palace also even , of spoke One o President . in remember it hook , I Italy had - in morning ' of
 that I about time remember also Italy spoke Rome palace the though of o at Governor One with of General presidential morning it . even the had was - two that television was Schreyer and Italy arranged telecommunications in , in - the things ' to President clock the in a hook , up we
 Governor about telecommunications in to time also had things One was even remember and the clock I morning Schreyer , television ' a . the o it spoke President - hook , Rome Italy the at - was General the with that Italy of in we palace two though presidential that arranged of in up
 the telecommunications Schreyer One the a we General in clock , o palace . things the spoke was even had about of ' that time it television the - Rome two Italy remember with also - in Governor at in President arranged I to and hook , up though presidential Italy was of that morning
 television spoke arranged General clock Italy hook One morning though ' up , also was Governor was remember a telecommunications I that at time to Schreyer things about in - palace presidential the the even the - two Italy that , we the of in it with of had President and in o . Rome
 even morning General with we One the at arranged Italy - Governor to ' in spoke it President a Italy palace , Schreyer Rome had . the hook o that two also was clock though things presidential that of about in was television - in I up the remember time the of and telecommunications ,
 of o we President also - television telecommunications about even clock in and arranged was , had - morning . was Italy Rome with it two , to in ' a spoke the the General at that the palace that in One time remember hook things though up the I Schreyer presidential Italy Governor of
 Schreyer and in in Rome One television a Italy though was ' had clock at was that of , two palace o . the morning telecommunications Italy I that spoke President the also presidential it - with of about the , up time in remember the Governor arranged - General things we to even hook
 time and remember a also in Italy General Schreyer the - of about it though ' clock we presidential that . President was One the Italy in with the the that hook - of in , was palace things had two television I arranged o even morning at up Governor , to Rome telecommunications spoke
 that at was with up time we President , Italy television two Governor Schreyer , presidential hook palace o the morning Rome it was of . also - arranged remember spoke General in of a had the Italy though ' that One in in the telecommunications to clock the - and about I things even
 - clock was Governor the telecommunications the , in in arranged of things at about time up of a ' the President spoke two One I - we . though remember the General , that with had morning to presidential it also even Italy and was Italy hook palace o television that Schreyer in Rome
I respect the Constitution.  
Honourable senators, this is a lawful request done in a lawful way. 
Perhaps certain words are egregious, but it is done in a lawful way, and I am prepared to support them. 
To my mind, the fact that they are prepared to proceed with their reforms before we legislate in any way, shape or form is their business; it is not my business. 
My business is to uphold the Constitution when they request we uphold processes under the Constitution.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
The reform of the school system in Quebec has nothing to do with the Constitution, even less with section 93. 
That was admitted in front of the committee.  
I will give you the answer to my question, and it should trouble all of us. 
The answer is that Quebec wants to be exempted from providing Catholic and Protestant teaching in the public school system. 
It has nothing to do with the linguistic school system, which will be in place - if the calendar is met - before the beginning of the next school year. 
They want to erase religious instruction from the school system, which is imposed on them. 
Narrow as it may be, unfair as it may be, and discriminatory as it may be, it was still renewed in 1982 and given protection from the Charter only 15 years ago. 
That is the reason. 
Do we want to be party to that?  
Do not mix up the reform of the system with the taking away of constitutional, legal rights of two identifiable religious faiths. 
That is what we are being asked to do.  
My personal opinion is that religion should not be in the schools, but that is probably old-fashioned now. 
I do not know. 
However, I will not argue that point.  
 One of the things I remember also was that we had arranged a telecommunications - television hook - up with the presidential palace in Rome , and Governor General Schreyer spoke to the President of Italy , even though that time it was about two o ' clock in the morning in Italy .
 General of even two and to in about telecommunications it Schreyer , at arranged Rome - that things also was was in in had though - spoke o Italy up clock Governor the that . with morning of I the palace hook the the President remember presidential ' , One television a Italy time
 with President hook time clock of about in even of presidential , One was I television we the in and arranged . Schreyer had telecommunications things Italy palace - at in o , spoke that Governor two morning was the a that - though General to remember ' also the Italy up the Rome
 things we palace the to and in clock the the o . even , General , morning telecommunications remember television a - hook President also I of up though Italy with ' that - time Schreyer was in One at presidential the was of arranged in Rome about spoke had Italy two it Governor
That night we had televisions set up on both sides of the Atlantic, and they had a great conversation to commemorate the 75th anniversary of the first trans-Atlantic wireless message from North America to Great Britain.  
 wireless we great of America - sides from of and up Atlantic first , had North both the Great televisions the night That to to . a Britain set on they the trans conversation Atlantic had message commemorate 75th anniversary
 That North and televisions America commemorate the the - first wireless both Britain trans we message had of up on Great had set great 75th a conversation of . to to they the Atlantic from , sides night Atlantic anniversary
 both a 75th to set America and commemorate sides the the North of had message televisions anniversary on wireless That Atlantic , Atlantic the of Britain . night conversation to - first we Great trans great up from they had
 trans . and - televisions first they set commemorate a we the wireless , That on Atlantic Britain night the North America Great of 75th of Atlantic conversation had up great sides both message had from anniversary to to the
 Britain televisions both trans first they from set the Great on had of night up of commemorate Atlantic wireless America 75th a the . to the , to sides we conversation North Atlantic That great had - anniversary and message
 televisions on sides the wireless message anniversary 75th of both the the had Great America first Atlantic of Atlantic That , we commemorate from had night to conversation a they . to and set Britain trans great - North up
 America great on sides of televisions up to Great and the North - had wireless they Atlantic the Atlantic Britain the 75th conversation anniversary from . set we to of had a first That trans message commemorate , night both
 the the from , message 75th set first up conversation night televisions a Britain on Atlantic had they America . wireless Great great trans both - Atlantic commemorate we the to North to sides and of That had of anniversary
 Britain Great from of sides they America had to set had the to the a televisions anniversary and commemorate of first - Atlantic Atlantic on night message conversation 75th both That the North we . , trans wireless great up
 Atlantic . North both televisions the up conversation great - to sides America of of anniversary Atlantic That they wireless had from commemorate trans 75th to and had the Great , Britain a set we night message first the on
 on first up the . sides set had conversation to America Atlantic North from night of they the 75th a to That Atlantic we wireless Great had - and the Britain anniversary great televisions both of commemorate trans message ,
 Great conversation on commemorate trans had to a sides we That and Atlantic night Britain the wireless anniversary , Atlantic of great message had televisions set . first they - America both the of the up to 75th North from
 televisions night to the first and wireless we of - anniversary North That America message up Atlantic the to from had . trans Britain of great set sides , a had both on 75th Great conversation Atlantic commemorate they the
 trans commemorate anniversary , from Atlantic had up night of televisions wireless to and a Great great America - the we sides set Atlantic . conversation of the the That first Britain had they message to both on 75th North
 the . , great message set to Atlantic a Great both of conversation had night first sides televisions of Britain Atlantic up North the the wireless and on to That had trans commemorate they - from we anniversary 75th America
 - conversation of the on the from Britain of Atlantic North America anniversary That the trans and televisions sides message great had a . we to night 75th to Great up wireless set both had Atlantic they , first commemorate
I am already hearing cries of alarm from those who will claim that the Senate, by adopting this attitude, will cause a delay which could compromise the reforms the Government of Quebec has in mind. 
I would like to remind those with such concerns that the reforms are already happening, are far advanced even, and do not need amendment of section 93 to reach their conclusion.  
The amendment to section 93 will do away with the confessional school boards and the dissentient boards only, and these will have to stay in place until the end of the current academic year early next summer.  
Hence the argument that it is essential for Parliament to make a decision before the end of the year has no justification.  
I hope that honourable senators will not be taken in by the specious argument that the sooner we approve the resolution, the more we will show how well the federation works. 
That is a sentiment which was trumpeted ad nauseum by government supporters following the adoption of the resolution in the other place. 
It is a sentiment which is certainly not shared by members of the Quebec government. 
Constitutional amendments affect all Canadians, even if their immediate impact is felt in only one region of the country. 
They must not be treated lightly, particularly as they affect minorities. 
The federation's value lies in this country's historic respect for the individuality of minorities and for their desire not to have this individuality crushed by the numerical weight of the majority.  
What we are being asked to do in the final analysis is remove constitutionally guaranteed rights, as discriminatory as they may be by today's standards, and entrust them to a province which will honour them for a given period, with no guarantee that they will be incorporated on a permanent basis. 
The National Assembly has endorsed this unanimously, as did most witnesses who stayed with the issue, with varying degrees of enthusiasm. 
Prominent legal experts even argued that various Supreme Court decisions have interpreted section 93 in such a way that it has lost much of its significance.  
All this may be true, but there are still Quebecers who feel that by adopting the resolution they will be abandoned by the very Parliament whose responsibility it is to protect them.  
I wish to end my remarks by quoting from an opinion which was given to the Quebec government by what is known as the Catholic Committee of the Education Council of the province of Quebec, a consultative body which is asked to give its views on issues affecting the Catholic religion in schools. 
This opinion was written and delivered following the hearings of the joint committee. 
It is very pertinent that we are all aware of them.  
I wish to quote from four paragraphs, and I am not quoting them out of context, as the sentiment in the four paragraphs I will quote reflect the tone of the entire paper. 
The implications of the constitutional amendment requested by the Quebec government are not easy to interpret or measure accurately. 
Concerns and objections have been expressed, particularly by the English Catholic and French Protestant minorities. 
 That night we had televisions set up on both sides of the Atlantic , and they had a conversation to commemorate the 75th anniversary of the first trans - Atlantic wireless message from North America to Great Britain .
 commemorate Britain wireless to on of great night Atlantic Great 75th the That had conversation North Atlantic , both they first up the message from we of and . sides the set trans anniversary - a to America televisions
 televisions on Great wireless anniversary from North up we - trans . had Atlantic set message the Atlantic both great to and of , conversation night first Britain the commemorate a America they to sides 75th of the That
 . televisions That , we both up set commemorate of conversation had trans - Britain to wireless first the night North Atlantic message the had the a of anniversary Atlantic great on to 75th from sides Great America and
Shortly after that, I rose to speak at a federal-provincial conference and made mention of that occasion. 
 - rose I . and made speak provincial at after of Shortly mention occasion that conference federal that to a ,
 mention conference federal that speak Shortly I - and to of , . provincial at after rose made that occasion a
 at made I occasion federal Shortly conference of . , that to provincial and that speak - a mention rose after
 Shortly occasion a . and after at conference to - I provincial rose made mention federal , that speak of that
 , made speak rose provincial that occasion and after at that I conference federal mention . a to - Shortly of
 and that of occasion I mention at conference a that to made . - Shortly speak federal after rose provincial ,
 after that occasion conference - made provincial to federal Shortly at of a mention that rose , speak I . and
 I . conference , provincial made occasion of after that speak a that Shortly and to rose federal mention at -
 that a mention . of conference to after provincial occasion speak I and - rose at made , Shortly that federal
 of to made at that rose occasion mention after Shortly federal provincial a and speak conference . , that I -
 speak Shortly that to conference that a mention rose . occasion , made of and provincial I - federal at after
 that federal mention Shortly I provincial - speak after of conference a that . made and to at occasion , rose
 federal rose conference I that to a of speak - provincial occasion Shortly at and after mention made . , that
 I a speak made mention rose Shortly - to occasion and of after federal . conference at provincial that that ,
 speak . mention at rose provincial of and conference - made that occasion federal Shortly to I that a , after
 federal - that , to . mention conference after a at rose I and provincial Shortly occasion speak of that made
Now he says: "Rush Bill C-2. 
Trust me." 
The minister says that he needs the bill now to satisfy an agreement with the provinces. 
I have heard of no agreement. 
No one here has heard of an agreement. 
If someone on the other side knows of an agreement, please tell me.  
We have not heard one province asking us to abandon our parliamentary responsibilities and rush this bill through by January 1 on the threat that they will cancel their agreement. 
The Minister of Finance is rushing so that he can get another $400 million in taxes for the 1997 tax year. 
The brunt of this bill is being borne by middle- and lower-income workers.  
Merry Christmas Canada. 
Let us give Canadians a Christmas present by defeating this bill. 
Let us kill the bill.  
We are well aware of the Liberal record. 
We resent the fact that this bill will not be given full Senate scrutiny. 
We also know what will happen when things go wrong with this bill, as they will. 
I outlined the government's record on making promises. 
We know its record on responsibility. 
I can just see it. 
When this bill is in shambles, Paul Martin will be 95. 
Jean Chrétien will be 95 or 96 or 102.  
 Shortly after that , I rose to speak at a federal - provincial conference and made mention that occasion .
 . speak mention to that occasion that at made after - federal I , of provincial rose and Shortly a
 to . I mention that provincial occasion made that - conference Shortly after speak at rose and of , federal
 provincial speak mention and that federal occasion at - I that . to Shortly after conference a , of made
Well, it did happen in Cape Breton. 
 Well did Breton in . , Cape happen it
 Well it . , Breton did happen Cape in
 happen Breton Well did in it Cape . ,
 in it , Cape happen did . Well Breton
 Breton happen , . in Well did Cape it
 . Breton did in happen Well Cape it ,
 it Breton Well did . , in happen Cape
 . in Breton it , happen Cape did Well
 Cape in it happen . , Well Breton did
 in happen Cape . it , Breton did Well
 happen Well Breton , did Cape it in .
 in Cape it Well happen Breton . , did
 Well Cape it . Breton , happen did in
 Breton it Well , . in did Cape happen
 happen in it Cape . , Well did Breton
 in Well , it happen Breton Cape . did
As far as business investment is concerned, will the populations of the provinces agree to have their savings used for businesses in other provinces at the expense of their own? 
Will the provincial governments be tempted to influence the investment board to serve their interests? 
A moment ago I said that when a government agency, a public office, is created, there is a risk of politicizing the process.  
Participation in business, with such enormous amounts, cannot be limited to a few major companies - the Canadian market is not all that big - but will also extend to a multitude of medium-sized businesses. 
The available funding will be sufficient to invest in hundreds of medium-sized businesses. 
In Quebec, for example, if I remember correctly from its last report, the Caisse de dépôt already invests in almost 800 Quebec businesses.  
Now, how are these 800 to be selected and monitored? 
There is likely to be arbitrariness and patronage.  
In addition, the Board will be everywhere and inevitably set conditions. 
Businesses will have to toe the line as the provinces do when Ottawa doles out conditional funding, as you may recall. 
This concentration of power, this centralization will be unhealthy. 
This technocracy and its perverse effects make me nervous. 
I hope one day we will have nothing worse than Mr. Sorros' manoeuvres to criticize.  
The regulations governing investments and the behaviour of administrators have not been revealed. 
They are not ready. 
What guidelines will there be for administrators? 
A parliamentary review is therefore vital before their implementation.  
In concluding, I would say to the government that the preferable alternative to its bill would be to simply oblige everyone in the labour force in Canada to invest a percentage of their savings in funds under private management or let government assume its role by providing a safety net for those who could not set aside enough money for their old age.  
Here is an intelligent response to the challenge before us. 
However, and it is regrettable in this era of the welfare state, it seems to me that we prefer to make sweeping rules that apply to everyone in order to resolve the problem of a few.  
 Well , it did in Cape Breton .
 in . Breton Well Cape it happen ,
 Cape did , Breton in it . happen
 , in happen Breton . it did Well
Senator Rizzuto and I talked about that many times in the years since I came to this place. 
 and since . Senator times I place talked years about came many this Rizzuto I that in to the
 that I to years came I talked in since and times about many Rizzuto place the Senator this .
 since the . many times Rizzuto to this I years in Senator came about place that talked I and
 Senator to since in . I this and place that about years the came talked many times I Rizzuto
 Senator the this that talked many about I I place Rizzuto to times and came in since years .
 talked . and in times that to years since I came Rizzuto place I this about the many Senator
 in about I this I years came Senator that many and Rizzuto to talked the times since . place
 to place . I Senator this came talked the that about since in times years many Rizzuto I and
 in the since and . I I about came Rizzuto talked this place years that to many Senator times
 in times that . Rizzuto Senator talked many this years place I to since I about and came the
 since years this that talked to in I and times . came I Senator many place about the Rizzuto
 that talked many since years to . this about in and Rizzuto the place times I I Senator came
 in I came many this I Rizzuto years to that and Senator . the since about place times talked
 I talked that to years . about this place Rizzuto came in since many times I the Senator and
 many times since in this about and the to I place that . I came talked Senator years Rizzuto
 Senator place about since came I the talked that years . this many times I in and Rizzuto to
It dates back to October 1, 1997, to a question asked at that time by Senator Meighen, which is only 51 days ago.  
I will quote Senator Meighen, who said: 
It has been 51 days!  
On November 25, I said the following: 
In a paper released the week prior to November 25, the Association of Canadian Pension Management said that the Seniors Benefit will stifle savings. 
To quote from their paper: 
Middle-income Canadians might simply decide to supplement government programs through the accumulation of non-income producing capital, such as homes or interest-free mortgages for their children. 
They may simply avoid retirement savings plans that generate heavily taxed income...  
They go on to suggest that Ottawa structure the Seniors Benefit in such a way that it will not result in an effective tax rate in excess of 50 per cent.  
Was the government listening when I asked that question? 
Senator Graham said, "Of course, yes." 
Did the Leader of the Government in the Senate read The Financial Post editorial that morning in which it was recommended that this problem be changed to reflect such an issue? 
From what I understand, in the other place all amendments have been struck down and no further amendments are coming forward. 
As we know, no amendments were passed.  
Changes to pension legislation represents one of the largest issues facing seniors as they move into retirement. 
Seniors, as a whole, do not know about these changes. 
Has the government developed a communications plan to inform Canadians of this issue prior to the passage of this bill? 
To that inquiry, Senator Graham replied, "Yes." 
He also said that this was a matter to which I had referred before, and that there are 1-800 lines available. 
He said that that was the communication plan on the part of the government.  
 Senator Rizzuto and I talked about that many in the years since I came to this place .
 the place to I since times . and many Senator years came this Rizzuto talked I that about
 . that Rizzuto I Senator since many in times about years talked I the came to and place
 times in . I Senator place and many years the this that about since talked came I to
The Governor General, Rod Maloney, the Italian consul for the provinces, Senator Pietro Rizzuto and me unveiled a plaque to his countryman, Guglielmo Marconi.  
 , Rod the for , and . The Pietro provinces to Rizzuto , Guglielmo the General Maloney a , Marconi unveiled Italian consul me plaque Senator his countryman Governor
 Marconi plaque The Guglielmo Maloney consul Pietro me for , and provinces a Italian , Senator , unveiled General . the , the Governor Rod countryman to Rizzuto his
 Rizzuto General provinces and , unveiled Maloney his Guglielmo Pietro a plaque for to , consul Italian Governor me Senator the , . the countryman , Marconi The Rod
 Italian consul Maloney , Rod General Pietro Rizzuto Guglielmo the and to his . , Marconi provinces Governor The a the Senator countryman for , plaque , unveiled me
 countryman and Senator consul plaque , me the for unveiled provinces Maloney , a his . , to Marconi The the Guglielmo Rizzuto Rod , Governor Italian General Pietro
 , and Italian the Rizzuto unveiled his consul Pietro . , countryman a Maloney The Governor General me Rod provinces , plaque , for Senator the Marconi Guglielmo to
 countryman Governor , , provinces Pietro Senator General Rizzuto plaque Guglielmo unveiled a the . , The me his for Marconi , Rod to Maloney Italian consul and the
 Pietro the , consul to Marconi for provinces me Rizzuto , The plaque countryman , Rod his Governor unveiled General Maloney Guglielmo and , the a . Italian Senator
 General to provinces me countryman and unveiled , a , the , the Maloney for , Guglielmo plaque his Marconi Rod Italian Governor consul Rizzuto Pietro . The Senator
 . provinces Italian , a the Governor his Marconi Senator Maloney unveiled consul Rod plaque to , me Pietro , Guglielmo , The General the for Rizzuto countryman and
 Rod consul Rizzuto his for , countryman provinces Italian , to The Pietro . , the , Marconi unveiled Governor and the Senator Maloney a me Guglielmo General plaque
 Rod the and consul , General Governor Marconi unveiled me . Senator Italian countryman Pietro Rizzuto plaque , for the , a Guglielmo , to The his provinces Maloney
 , , countryman to plaque Senator the a General The and Rizzuto the unveiled Marconi Rod me Governor provinces , Pietro . consul Italian Maloney , for his Guglielmo
 Rod a for consul plaque and his . Guglielmo Marconi unveiled Pietro , , countryman , the Italian me the Senator General to Maloney The Rizzuto Governor , provinces
 , a me for Senator Italian Governor Pietro the , countryman the to his provinces unveiled The . Rizzuto Rod plaque and Maloney consul , , Guglielmo General Marconi
 General provinces , Rod the Rizzuto Pietro Italian and , , for The Marconi his Governor the plaque , a Maloney to unveiled consul Guglielmo Senator . me countryman
Senator Bolduc :
In Quebec, when the problem came up in connection with the pension plan in 1966, we insisted on having our own plan. 
I am not saying that this is how it should be across Canada; that is not my point. 
What I am saying is that, in Quebec, at the time, Jean Lesage had made it very clear that the fund was designed to provide social security. 
That is why we fought so hard for the Caisse de dépôt et placement at the time: to have this flexibility.  
I am not saying this practice should be generalized and extended to Ontario or any other province; it may cause problems I had not thought of so far. 
There is no doubt that it could be more difficult for some provinces. 
I do not exclude however the idea that provincial politicians could bring pressure to bear on this organization so that, when investments are made, people from each region benefit. 
To what extent will ethics and conflict of interest rules be overlooked? 
My experience tells me and I can tell you that it is going to be complicated.  
Hon. Terry Stratton :
Honourable senators, I should like participate in the debate on Bill C-2, the Canada Pension Plan.  
They were informed; and they could understand the information they were being given.  
At the end of every television interview, the finance minister reiterated that, if they did not like the private sector pension plan, they could stick with the public sector pension plan. 
He did this all the way through, for months, until it came time for the people to decide which plan they wanted.  
Within the first six weeks, 25 per cent of the public were in the private pension plan. 
Today, 90 per cent of the public are in the private pension plan, and that plan is doing extremely well. 
Despite the crisis with the Mexican peso, which involves their next door neighbour, their equity market survived, and is, in fact, doing well. 
Investors are getting good returns.  
Two lessons are to be learned from that. 
 The Governor General , Rod Maloney , the Italian consul for the provinces , Senator Pietro Rizzuto and me unveiled a plaque to countryman , Guglielmo Marconi .
 consul to unveiled . countryman Marconi The plaque the and Senator Rod provinces me for Pietro Rizzuto , Maloney , Guglielmo General Governor a , , Italian his
 Guglielmo General . consul the Governor countryman Maloney Senator The plaque and unveiled to Pietro , Italian his the , Rod , Rizzuto , Marconi a me provinces
 a Marconi Maloney , , Rizzuto Pietro the and General countryman to consul his The , plaque unveiled Senator me for . Italian , the Rod provinces Guglielmo
The next day, I arranged for a helicopter to take Senator Rizzuto, the Governor General, Mrs. Braga, Rod Maloney and me to Sugar Loaf in the highlands of Cape Breton, where we unveiled another plaque, and it is still there. 
 where , Sugar , unveiled Rod The , the Loaf a Governor Cape take it arranged there . to we plaque another Breton day Senator in Maloney Mrs to , Braga the still , I next , highlands of is and General me Rizzuto helicopter and for .
 and , General of to Braga The highlands , , the Rod Cape for Loaf still helicopter another where Sugar , the it take Breton a , and is Mrs Maloney day Governor next Senator Rizzuto I arranged , . . in me plaque unveiled to we there
 to for a where , , General next , The the Senator it Rod Maloney Cape I , there to day Governor plaque helicopter is , we , highlands Sugar Breton take arranged still and Braga of me . unveiled Rizzuto another the Mrs . in and Loaf
 Sugar plaque of there in , another to and is next where Cape , Rod , we the Maloney . a Governor day Braga me Senator take , Rizzuto , unveiled for the to Mrs arranged helicopter still , The I Breton it highlands . General Loaf and
 Mrs of highlands Breton Loaf still Sugar , there plaque arranged , it , Cape the and The . to helicopter next we I Rod , Senator and Braga , where , for is Maloney the Governor day Rizzuto General a to . take in another me unveiled
 Maloney is Loaf Cape highlands Rod The another Rizzuto General next a . to day , , the I plaque Sugar where we , arranged it still Braga . of to Governor for and there Mrs , unveiled me take helicopter Senator the and , , in Breton
 , Sugar where I Cape we highlands the , Senator the unveiled is to The General and day Loaf , plaque Governor and Rod to in of take it for Mrs , next still arranged Maloney , Rizzuto me , there . . Braga another Breton helicopter a
 Rod , still the in I , The Sugar , me unveiled General the and Cape take and we a it Senator plaque Loaf helicopter Breton Maloney , to where day arranged there for of . to Mrs Governor . next another Braga , , is Rizzuto highlands
 another Rod Breton unveiled in Governor to and helicopter day a Maloney next Mrs General of , The there the , . and Cape , it , highlands for Senator is , the to I arranged Braga where , Loaf still me we plaque Rizzuto . take Sugar
 to to the , of where the another Cape plaque Loaf I we in a , Maloney me take Sugar next unveiled . highlands helicopter and and , it , General Breton . Rizzuto , for there The Senator still Governor day is Braga arranged Rod , Mrs
 General and Mrs for arranged day Maloney Breton , in to Sugar highlands Cape there still a Rizzuto , . and plaque the . Governor where Rod to , , take , Senator is Braga Loaf next unveiled me the of I we The , helicopter another it
 in it Loaf me and for of Senator Governor still , helicopter where we day , Braga another the . I next plaque to Mrs the , Cape , The and there highlands Breton , Sugar General Rizzuto a unveiled arranged to , take Rod is . Maloney
 take another , Mrs arranged Governor we day Senator , Braga , The for highlands Cape it is Sugar next still Loaf the Rod a and plaque Maloney . in to of there , , Breton helicopter where and the Rizzuto unveiled General , . me I to
 . Loaf where in day Senator , to , it highlands a for The the me and Maloney , is General . there take unveiled Breton arranged the , and Governor , next another Sugar Cape still to , plaque of I Rizzuto Mrs we Rod helicopter Braga
 still the Mrs Loaf Braga , another General Cape of and . , Senator , where Sugar . The Rod , in helicopter and next plaque for the me is highlands , Rizzuto to take arranged day we I unveiled there a Breton , it Maloney Governor to
 Loaf another Senator Mrs , arranged to plaque Cape a and we of Breton highlands helicopter Rizzuto where I day General it , Braga still next and The . , Maloney the , me , to there . , Governor for in Sugar Rod the take is unveiled
Indeed, many of us remain unhappy and regret the federal government's position taken with 23(1)( a ) then and now. 
I share, with Senator Pitfield and others, concern in that respect. 
However, unfortunately, I have a memory, and I recall very well that the 1982 Constitution, for which Senator Pitfield was a senior federal advisor, was a minimalist not a maximalist document. 
It was Senator Pitfield and others in power at the time who determined that, in order to pass the 1982 Constitution, the Province of Quebec should be given the option of proclaiming section 23(1)( a ) and that the notwithstanding clause would be incorporated in the 1982 Constitution to eviscerate the charter, both serious sources of our current distress.  
Many of us objected strenuously then, and do now, to giving the Province of Quebec these options. 
However, that is history. 
Many of us objected to the notwithstanding clause pressed by the other provinces, particularly Manitoba. 
Senator Pitfield was there. 
He understood that. 
This I remember.  
However flawed the 1982 Constitution was with regard to these two aspects, the special joint committee shared a defining moment. 
For the first time since 1982, two ministers from the Province of Quebec have appeared before a special joint committee of Parliament in Ottawa and have, in public hearings, given de facto and de jure recognition to the 1982 Constitution. 
Pluralism and the new demographics was the dialectic that we heard emanating from the Bloc members. 
They talked about pluralism - for the very first time. 
Surely, with patience, good ideas can have great roots and can grow great and mighty trees.  
However, members of the Reform Party, who proclaim equality across the land as a benchmark of their political theology, could not see their way fit to resolve the inequality as presented by section 93 when the opportunity presented itself.  
Honourable senators, I fully support the report and the federal resolution. 
The way ahead for the Quebec educators, parents and students will not be easy. 
Reforms in educational systems, as we have seen in Ontario in recent days, are difficult, fraught with peril and beset with misunderstanding. 
However, I cannot but be impressed with the desire of the Province of Quebec and its citizens to renovate and modernize its school system and move it forward so that the next generation of Canadian citizens, born and educated in the province of Quebec, and others, will be able more fully to participate in our modern Canadian economy.  
 The next day , arranged for a helicopter to take Senator Rizzuto , the Governor General , Mrs . Braga , Rod Maloney and me to Sugar Loaf in the highlands of Cape Breton , where we unveiled another plaque , and it is still there .
 the arranged , in , Cape plaque , and Governor unveiled the , Rizzuto where Braga to Loaf General Mrs and Maloney The highlands Senator a , next I , . . me still of is it take helicopter Sugar there to day we Breton Rod another
 . I to helicopter it we Maloney , Cape , Breton . , in the take of , day Braga another me to Rizzuto and plaque where Governor Loaf for and unveiled is Rod , , highlands arranged there still The Mrs Sugar Senator the General a
 day it the next highlands for arranged . Breton still and take helicopter I Governor , where The another unveiled me Senator to in plaque , , Maloney Braga Sugar Rod to General of we there the Mrs is a . Rizzuto , and , Cape ,
Senator Graham and I were back there in June to commemorate Giovanni Caboto's first landfall in North America at Sugar Loaf. 
 America there in first North and I Loaf Giovanni Senator Caboto at . commemorate Sugar June s back landfall in ' were Graham to
 commemorate first back landfall America in Graham Senator North Loaf were Giovanni Sugar s I June and there in . at ' to Caboto
 back landfall America there ' Giovanni first North . commemorate Loaf Sugar Caboto I Senator Graham were in in at s and June to
 Senator Sugar were landfall Caboto ' and Giovanni June s Loaf America at I . Graham in back commemorate first to North in there
 . first back I s Senator Sugar North Giovanni commemorate at Caboto June in Loaf in were ' and there to landfall America Graham
 America at North and ' landfall back in to commemorate Sugar s Caboto June first in Senator Graham I Giovanni were Loaf there .
 Senator there to I in landfall commemorate Sugar Graham Caboto June North first ' . America were in and at Loaf Giovanni back s
 North I there America to Caboto were s June in Senator ' at Sugar commemorate Giovanni landfall . and back Loaf in first Graham
 were Caboto commemorate s . first Giovanni Graham back I Senator North at in America ' landfall in and Sugar there Loaf June to
 first landfall in in North June America s commemorate . Caboto Senator Sugar Graham to were back at Giovanni ' there I and Loaf
 in ' there commemorate I Sugar in Senator to and first landfall s Caboto North Giovanni Graham America Loaf June were at . back
 America Loaf at were back to Caboto in . first landfall s Giovanni Sugar June and in ' Graham North there Senator I commemorate
 North . back there to in first America Sugar in Giovanni commemorate Senator I landfall Loaf and June ' were at Graham s Caboto
 and landfall I ' America there first were Graham Sugar commemorate to Loaf s Giovanni in in North . Senator at June back Caboto
 in there Graham I and Sugar America Giovanni Loaf back ' were first in June s commemorate Caboto at . North landfall to Senator
 Sugar North to Loaf first at commemorate in Giovanni Graham s America were landfall back ' and in Senator Caboto there I June .
In fact, as has been said here and elsewhere, considering the decision of the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs that government support for the amendment to section 93 of the Constitution was already an established fact and that the government majority in committee left no doubt as to what conclusions it would reach, the committee's role could have been limited to that of a rubber stamp.  
Furthermore, the committee was not allowed to hold hearings outside Ottawa and was required to table its report no later than November 7, 1997, with only three weeks to hear witnesses and prepare its report. 
What a contrast with the extremely slow process followed by many less important bills that gather dust for months on parliamentary shelves before receiving Royal Assent.  
In his November 27, 1997 speech, Senator Wood gave a very good description of the strait-jacket in which the joint committee had to work. 
Everything was rushed. 
No announcements were made that hearings were being held, contrary to what is usually done. 
The list of witnesses changed almost from hour to hour. 
Some witnesses had only a few hours' notice that they would be appearing before the committee, and their presentations suffered as a result, as they said themselves.  
Under such conditions, it was quite normal that participation in the committee could have been interpreted as sanctioning the conditions imposed by and for the government. 
However, this was an issue that was worth risking this false interpretation, because the Parliament of Canada is dealing with a request from the Quebec National Assembly, with its sovereignist majority, to exempt Quebec from certain constitutional obligations it has had to live with for 130 years.  
Unfortunately, there was not enough time to involve the committee in preparatory briefings in order for it to have as complete an appreciation and understanding as possible of all the implications of Quebec's resolution. 
As a result, it tended to stray from the substance of the reference before it. 
"Religious education," "religious instruction," "denominational schools," "confessional schools," "linguistic rights," "minority rights" and other terms were used so often that they tended to become interchangeable to the point that they occasionally melded together.  
Section 93 was a result of a compromise at a time when two religious beliefs dominated everyday life in Canada to an extent hard to describe today when even one's most difficult moral decisions are usually self-determined, rather than imposed without question by a recognized higher authority. 
In 1867, Catholics and Protestants were guaranteed certain privileges which were not even considered for other religious denominations. 
Their numbers and influences were such that the idea that a section 93 was nothing else but a deserved right did not even arise.  
In the early 1980s, when a Canadian constitution was being debated, section 93 remained as it was written in 1867, despite the fact that Canadian society had evolved to the point where the debate we are now having should have been held then. 
Even more to the point, the authors of the Constitution Act recognized that section 93's limitations to two privileged Christian beliefs would conflict with the Charter's anti-discrimination implications, so much so that section 93 was provided immunity from the Charter in section 29. 
Indeed, section 29 could not be clearer. 
It reads as follows: 
 Senator Graham and I back there in June to commemorate Giovanni Caboto ' s first landfall in North America at Sugar Loaf .
 Senator in North . first Giovanni commemorate and landfall to June back ' Loaf there Graham America were in Caboto at Sugar I
 Senator there were North June America first . back and in at in to ' Loaf commemorate Sugar s I Caboto landfall Giovanni
 Graham in June s landfall Sugar back Caboto . North there America at and Giovanni to Loaf in first Senator commemorate ' I
The plaque is still there.  
 still is . plaque The there
 there plaque is still The .
 is The plaque . there still
 there plaque still is . The
 The still is . plaque there
 The there is . still plaque
 plaque there is The . still
 The still . is there plaque
 plaque still The there . is
 plaque still The is there .
 still plaque there is The .
 is plaque The still . there
 . still is plaque The there
 . The there still is plaque
 plaque still The . is there
 there The . plaque is still
However, I cannot but be impressed with the desire of the Province of Quebec and its citizens to renovate and modernize its school system and move it forward so that the next generation of Canadian citizens, born and educated in the province of Quebec, and others, will be able more fully to participate in our modern Canadian economy.  
To paraphrase Laurier from 100 years ago, the 21st century will indeed belong to Canada.  
Hon. Therese Lavoie-Roux :
I should like to ask Senator Grafstein how he can affirm - perhaps we were not attending the same meeting - that Alliance Québec was in favour of the abolition of section 93?  
They were, as were most people, in favour of linguistic boards, but when it came to the abrogation of section 93, not only were they not in accord with that when they appeared before our committee, they even wrote to us to reconfirm their disagreement with the abrogation of section 93. 
However, Senator Grafstein has said that both the French-speaking Protestants and the English-speaking Catholics were certainly not in agreement, although they were in agreement with linguistic boards.  
It is not only the minority of the majority, in terms of the French-speaking Protestants, but also Alliance Québec that was in disagreement with this.  
I should like to raise many other points but, in view of the time, I will stop there.  
Senator Grafstein :
Honourable senators, I would refer my colleague to the transcript. 
Read the transcript. 
If there is a dispute about evidence, rather than taking my word or that of the honourable senator opposite - with whom I do disagree - senators should read the transcript. 
The transcript will speak for itself.  
Senator Lavoie-Roux :
I think all senators would have wanted to read the transcript, but we did not have enough time.  
The minister appeared before the committee on November 4. I asked him if he felt that minorities would be as well protected by section 23 of the Charter as they were by section 93 of the Constitution, and he said that they would not be as well protected.  
Senator Grafstein :
He and I have a different viewpoint on section 23(1)( a ) of the Charter.  
Hon. Dalia Wood :
Honourable senators, I have a question for the honourable senator.  
 The plaque is still .
 still is plaque there .
 is plaque still . The
 The plaque still is .
The next time I met Senator Rizzuto was at the opening of the Marconi Museum in Glace Bay. 
 I Glace Rizzuto next Museum Marconi was in met Senator the of . at opening the time Bay The
 I in was time Museum . the Rizzuto Senator Bay next met Glace Marconi opening the The at of
 at Bay the opening Museum in next The of Senator met I the Glace Marconi was Rizzuto time .
 Museum met The Glace in Bay the of opening next at . Senator Marconi time was I the Rizzuto
 time the in Glace Rizzuto Museum . was the met next at Bay I of The Senator opening Marconi
 of Senator the in the Museum was time Rizzuto Glace next at The . opening Marconi I met Bay
 the time I Rizzuto Glace of Senator The in opening at met . Marconi Bay the next Museum was
 the Glace . was Senator Museum Rizzuto in next at of opening Bay met time I the Marconi The
 at Senator met Marconi Glace I in opening the of Bay The . the Museum next Rizzuto time was
 Marconi The the opening Rizzuto met Glace Senator next the of time in Bay . Museum I at was
 was Museum Senator Marconi The at opening next met Rizzuto . time in the I Glace the Bay of
 next the of was . opening met I time Senator Museum Marconi at Bay Rizzuto Glace The in the
 time in at the Museum Glace Marconi met Rizzuto next Bay I The the opening . of was Senator
 time at the Rizzuto I in of The opening . next Museum met Bay the Marconi Glace was Senator
 Museum The time Glace Rizzuto met Senator the the of in I opening was Marconi Bay next at .
 in . Bay next The met the Senator Glace opening at was the Museum I of Rizzuto time Marconi
The negotiations are in a state of flux at the present time and it might be premature for me to speculate on what the outcome might be.  
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Target Year for Implementation of Government Position taken at Kyoto-Government Position 
Hon. Mira Spivak :
I thank the Leader of the Government for his answer. 
I should like to point out that Manitoba is distinct from Alberta, as are all provinces.  
In their December 1 announcement, the government also revealed that not until 1999 would they be able to provide more detail as to the costs and specific actions that would be required to meet our Kyoto commitments. 
Assuming that it will take some time to implement the actions that the government will propose in 1999, it could be the year 2000, 2001, 2002 or 2003 before the government takes steps to meet its Kyoto targets. 
Some of these actions will undoubtedly entail negotiations and agreements with provincial governments, which means it could be as late as 2006 before the government can meet the targets which were set out.  
Perhaps the Leader of the Government in the Senate could tell us in which year implementation of the Kyoto decisions will begin, because, surely, that must have been taken into consideration prior to the Kyoto meeting.  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Yes, honourable senators, discussions were held, and consideration was given to when the new objectives or conclusions of the Kyoto conference might be put in place, or kick into place, if I may use that terminology.  
I do not believe a final agreement has been reached on that. 
I know that the Government of Canada will cooperate with the provinces and territories and, in partnership with industry, the environmental groups and individual Canadians, develop a practical, flexible, step-by-step plan for reducing emissions. 
Many economic analyses of potential costs attributable to taking action to reduce emissions have been done, but no conclusions have been reached respecting timing or actual costs.  
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Informetrica Study on Meeting Targets-Government Position 
Hon. Mira Spivak :
Honourable senators, late last week, the consulting firm Informetrica released a study entitled, "The Scale of the Challenge for Reducing Canadian Greenhouse Gas Emissions." 
This report states: 
We conclude that there is almost no chance of meeting this goal in Canada under any reasonable economic scenario...  
And I stress this last part: 
 The next time I met Senator Rizzuto was the opening of the Marconi Museum in Glace Bay .
 The met of in was Bay opening time the at next I Rizzuto the Marconi Senator Glace .
 met the Senator Marconi the was next in time Bay The Glace opening . Rizzuto Museum at I
 Glace Bay met time was opening at in the the I . Rizzuto The Senator Marconi of next
Again, it is another bone of contention between Newfoundland and Nova Scotia, but the plaque is there. 
 of between bone is Scotia there and Again the but , contention Newfoundland is another , Nova it . plaque
 Scotia it there Again is . , another bone the Nova of , Newfoundland contention is but between and plaque
 . it plaque is of another there , is Again and but Newfoundland contention the Nova , Scotia bone between
 , Newfoundland it there but of . Again is contention , bone another plaque is between and Nova the Scotia
 contention Newfoundland it Nova there and of , . plaque , is Scotia is but another Again the bone between
 is bone the Nova there another contention Scotia , Newfoundland and Again . of plaque , between it is but
 plaque Scotia and Nova there , it bone but contention is another Newfoundland Again of the between is , .
 is bone and between contention it , is plaque Again there Nova but the Scotia . , Newfoundland of another
 Again is , , there of and contention between Nova the another plaque Newfoundland is . it bone Scotia but
 Newfoundland and is another plaque there but it contention Again Nova of between bone is , . , Scotia the
 between of , Nova but . Newfoundland it bone contention there is the another Scotia is , Again and plaque
 Nova is . Scotia there contention , is but and between the Again another bone Newfoundland plaque of , it
 Again but Nova and it the there between is of contention Newfoundland plaque , is , bone another Scotia .
 there and but is the . of Scotia Nova , bone between is , it contention Again Newfoundland another plaque
 Nova Newfoundland contention , of the between plaque . and , is is Again but there it Scotia bone another
 is , another but is contention , it Scotia between of Again plaque and Nova bone Newfoundland there the .
I truly appreciate all the support I have received from my colleagues regarding this subject. 
Thanks to all of you.  
History of the Vote in Canada 
Book Launched by Governor General 
Hon. Mabel M. DeWare :
Honourable senators, yesterday, the Right Honourable Romeo LeBlanc, Governor General of Canada, launched an important new book, A History of the Vote in Canada , which recounts how the right to vote has evolved over the past 250 years. 
The book starts at the time of the first elected legislatures in what is now Canada and ends with the most recent federal election. 
It traces changes in voting eligibility, electioneering and voting practices, as well as voter turnout since Confederation. 
Extension of the vote to those who were excluded legally from the franchise, such as women, aboriginal people, religious and racial minorities, is examined in the social context of the period.  
Even though most Canadian adults were eligible to vote by 1920, there is a final chapter that looks at ways to make voting accessible to everyone, including people in all geographic locations and people with physical disabilities.  
A History of the Vote in Canada is meant to be an educational resource and a reminder to Canadians of the significance of the right to vote. 
This is in keeping with Elections Canada's 1993 mandate to educate voters about the democratic right to vote.  
While this book will appeal to historians, political scientists, university and high school teachers and students, it is hoped that it will also reach those who may have difficulty exercising their right to vote.  
As parliamentarians, honourable senators, it is our role to help promote this book and educate our fellow citizens on their rights as voters.  
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
Report of Committee 
Hon. Ron Ghitter , Chair of the Standing Senate Committee on Energy, the Environment and Natural Resources, presented the following report: 
Tuesday, December 9, 1997 
The Standing Senate Committee on Energy, the Environment and Natural Resources has the honour to present its 
SECOND REPORT 
 Again , it is another bone contention between Newfoundland and Nova Scotia , but the plaque is there .
 is Nova Again Scotia contention and Newfoundland there of between but , bone . , it the is plaque
 is plaque Scotia . , is and there but it another of between the Nova contention , Again bone
 Scotia and Newfoundland is bone , the there it . is between plaque , Nova Again but contention of
We opened the museum, which is one of the finest museums you will find in Canada.  
 will which museum . of find opened finest , you in We is Canada museums one the the
 find the We you museum opened . is will finest , of which the museums Canada in one
 museums in will find opened . is of , museum Canada one which the the We you finest
 will which museums you one the . find the of Canada We opened is finest , in museum
 opened find Canada in of is museum the you one . finest museums , We will which the
 museum which you find the the finest is will , opened We in one Canada . museums of
 We opened one museum . will , is museums find the in the Canada you of which finest
 in is opened , find We the the . museums finest Canada of which you will one museum
 . which one Canada We museums is you finest museum the of the will in , find opened
 which the is will finest . the museums We you of find museum Canada in one , opened
 opened one in of the Canada will finest the . you which find is , We museums museum
 Canada one of , in museum will which finest you . the find We opened museums is the
 will opened of which finest Canada in the find museums you , the one museum . We is
 the Canada of museums the . finest find will which in you one , opened museum is We
 Canada . you We opened museums in finest will is find of the one museum which , the
 the you We in Canada the of museum find one , will finest museums . opened is which
This bill has important consequences for many of us, and more particularly, for our children and our grandchildren. 
Those people who are already retired and at the age of 65 will receive all their benefits. 
For those people who are in the middle and who will soon be retiring, it is not a big problem for them. 
They will have some reduced benefits and some increased costs. 
To those people who have been paying all their lives - that is, all the baby boomers who will begin to turn 50 - they will receive benefits and be faced with another 15 years of increased costs.  
I will tell you for whom this is important. 
I have a daughter who is 24 and a son who is 21. 
Many of you have children and grandchildren. 
The government is asking them to pay 9.9 per cent - I am sure it is 9.9 per cent because the minister wanted the number to be under the figure 10. That represents 10 per cent of their income, and it will increase with inflation. 
The $35,000 that they pay on today will inevitably be more tomorrow.  
As inflation eats away at it and the numbers rise, that number remains the same. 
This goes against everything we have ever done on this program since its inception in 1966. 
It stays the same. 
In 10 or 15 years, that $3,500 will be worth $1,500, $1,000, $500, depending on what government does and what happens to inflation.  
Senator Taylor :
Elect the Liberals and it will be high!  
Senator Tkachuk :
If we elect the Liberals, inflation will be high? 
We already know that! 
Let me continue in that vein. 
 We opened the museum , which is one the finest museums you will find in Canada .
 one museums . finest you the in the , find of museum which opened will Canada We
 , the one museums finest will of Canada the opened you in which . find We is
 find Canada of the which museum is opened one museums We in , will you . finest
When I came to this place over six years ago, I was so pleased to renew my friendship with Pietro Rizzuto. 
 I renew so with my place Pietro pleased to When , came was six ago . years over to this I Rizzuto friendship
 to ago I came , my When this . over renew I Pietro was so pleased place years to friendship six with Rizzuto
 to this ago pleased When place my Pietro with friendship years Rizzuto , I . over six I so was to renew came
 . so was over ago , to six this came friendship I Pietro renew my years pleased I place Rizzuto with When to
 When six renew . came was with ago years this I over Pietro I Rizzuto to so place to , friendship my pleased
 , to was so I came to over friendship I Rizzuto pleased ago . When Pietro place my this with six renew years
 pleased came Rizzuto to I this renew with place Pietro to ago so six years , over I . friendship was my When
 place friendship renew I years was Rizzuto Pietro When I six came with ago to my pleased over , . this to so
 so ago my place Rizzuto When , I over six Pietro friendship to was years came to this pleased . I renew with
 this place pleased came so , my years I over Pietro to six to ago with Rizzuto was . I When friendship renew
 pleased was renew , came my six over with I to ago this I When place to . Pietro friendship Rizzuto so years
 I renew Rizzuto years was over this so , to Pietro pleased When . place to my six ago came I with friendship
 over was my so Pietro Rizzuto to years ago with this pleased When I to . came six place renew , friendship I
 ago came I Rizzuto so Pietro with over six my years pleased When , . was to this renew to friendship I place
 six ago was my to . this place with When renew Pietro Rizzuto , I friendship over pleased I came years to so
 Rizzuto to . pleased years place came this was to six so When my I ago Pietro with renew friendship I over ,
Now we come to the more difficult question confronting members of the committee - to determine if there was a "majority" of the so-called "minorities" affected or given these denominational privileges.  
Even here, we had difficulty in definition. 
Notwithstanding that, we still treated that majority as if it were a minority.  
I will not repeat Senator Stewart's questions yesterday about section 93 and its limited scope, but I commend all students of the Constitution to examine section 93 and see how even the subsections of section 93, in so far as that section pertains to the province of Quebec, are much narrower in its scope than is clearly understood or debated in this Senate chamber. 
I will not go into that aspect of this debate. 
It would take half an hour, but I would be pleased to do so privately with any senator who is interested.  
The evidence we heard was extensive, definitive and clear. 
Let me quickly review the committee's evidence that brought it to conclude that there was a strong majority of the so-called minorities affected.  
We had a unanimous resolution in the National Assembly of Quebec, both parties, with two abstentions. 
The efforts made by the Quebec ministers seem to assure that a strong consensus had been obtained.  
We heard direct evidence from 68 groups composed of over 100 individual witnesses. 
Notwithstanding the short time-frames allotted in our terms of reference and as referenced by Senator Lynch-Staunton, the committee clearly heard every viewpoint that people wished to express.  
I hear Senator Wood. 
I will deal with her concerns in a moment.  
While some individual groups did not give evidence, as pointed out by Senator Wood, I concluded that, having examined the materials from those groups, that their viewpoint was indeed expressed by others during the course of those hearings. 
I believe no viewpoint was excluded from our deliberations.  
The time frames in the hearings in no way diminished the committee's ability to obtain or weigh the evidence. 
The committee made a thorough investigation of that evidence. 
No point of view went unexamined, save for one raised by the Reform Party at the last minute, and I will deal with that later.  
Let me for a moment repeat what we heard. 
 When I came to this place over six years ago , I so pleased to renew my friendship with Pietro Rizzuto .
 . came friendship so pleased place Rizzuto six with to ago my was When I this I to renew Pietro over ,
 came ago my this I years I . Rizzuto Pietro pleased to over so six with to , When renew place friendship
 to years with friendship so pleased place over to my Pietro . came six Rizzuto this I When renew I was ,
Many times we would go into the reading room and talk about those days in Cape Breton when we honoured his two countrymen, Marconi and Caboto.  
 Breton go would Many in and about room talk reading , days Cape honoured his Marconi we . times those when Caboto we the countrymen and two into
 the two Caboto those honoured . , talk we in days into Cape countrymen Many room about times when and reading would we go Breton his and Marconi
 Breton days we those would , talk and about Caboto when into and in Many Cape honoured room Marconi the reading his two we times . countrymen go
 when in about days countrymen would and his Cape the two Many talk room honoured Caboto Marconi into times . those , Breton we and reading we go
 would , we his Marconi Many Cape and days reading Breton in those when room honoured talk two about . go into times the we countrymen Caboto and
 we we would two in room countrymen his and , Cape talk go Many Marconi into the about and . those Breton reading honoured when days Caboto times
 about honoured we room would Cape times Many his talk those and reading countrymen the we days and . Breton Marconi two when in , Caboto go into
 honoured room when those Breton Many Cape about . reading go days his Caboto we , two in would into times we talk the Marconi countrymen and and
 Many , and go his into Cape Caboto Breton two we talk those the in about days room honoured and would . times we countrymen reading when Marconi
 would the Caboto reading talk Many in . Breton days those honoured Marconi and and two his countrymen about when we , times Cape we room go into
 into , talk countrymen go and . would two about Cape his the in honoured Breton those room we and we Caboto Marconi times Many reading days when
 two Many talk Cape we room honoured would into go Caboto and and his times the when about . reading , countrymen those Breton days we Marconi in
 when . the his days go room about and countrymen two talk we in honoured times into reading and , Caboto would Many Cape Breton those Marconi we
 when and the times Cape reading two room in talk we and go countrymen into his Caboto we , would Marconi . Breton about days honoured Many those
 would and his those two room we . Cape in Marconi when countrymen we the go honoured and about , reading Breton into times days Many Caboto talk
 when talk room honoured go times into Marconi those two the would days in and Cape Breton his about reading Caboto and we we Many countrymen . ,
This goes against everything we have ever done on this program since its inception in 1966. 
It stays the same. 
In 10 or 15 years, that $3,500 will be worth $1,500, $1,000, $500, depending on what government does and what happens to inflation.  
Senator Taylor :
Elect the Liberals and it will be high!  
Senator Tkachuk :
If we elect the Liberals, inflation will be high? 
We already know that! 
Let me continue in that vein. 
Perhaps honourable senators opposite do not want to hear what Paul Martin will be doing, and the explaining that you will have to do back home in 10 or 15 years when your children ask you what you did about this bill. 
When they retire, their CPP benefits will be worth about what they put in, plus 2.5 per cent.  
I do not get it. 
I do not understand why we are being asked to do that to our children, so that those who are retiring today can receive full benefits and those who are retiring soon can get their benefits. 
I do not get it. 
I will try to explain it today, and - I hope I can convince you.  
The CPP is part of a larger program that Paul Martin is introducing. 
Everything involves reform. 
We will have a reform of the Old Age Security benefit, which is coming up after Christmas. 
It is important to get through this before Christmas so that we can consider changes in the cut-backs that will come due after Christmas. 
We on this side think that both matters should be discussed together because it is part of a pension program and a part of a social security net for people in this country who retire at 65 and who want to retire with some dignity.  
 Many times we would go into reading room and talk about those days in Cape Breton when we honoured his two countrymen , Marconi and Caboto .
 his and two reading when into countrymen in go those , Breton would room talk times and Marconi we days we honoured Cape . the Caboto Many
 and would into his we reading two go talk Breton honoured those the Many room Marconi Cape times , Caboto . and countrymen days we in when
 Many into go about . we times , we would two Caboto countrymen room those Marconi and Breton days reading honoured and in when the Cape his
Honourable senators, Senator Pietro Rizzuto was a dear man, a dear friend, and we will all miss him. 
 friend and , we a was , . Rizzuto Honourable man dear will Pietro all miss a dear senators him , Senator
 Pietro and was , all him friend Honourable senators . miss , dear man dear we will a Senator , a Rizzuto
 miss a . , Pietro , friend and senators dear Rizzuto was will we man all dear , him a Honourable Senator
 a Senator was dear Pietro , and Rizzuto miss a will him . all Honourable we , , friend senators man dear
 Honourable will Senator miss we dear was friend Pietro and . , , man Rizzuto all him a , senators a dear
 Honourable we miss was senators and dear Pietro friend , man all will dear a him , Rizzuto . Senator , a
 dear , him all Senator Rizzuto man and was . dear miss a we Pietro will , senators Honourable , a friend
 we , dear and a dear Pietro , miss all Senator Honourable . , Rizzuto friend will was senators him a man
 and , a . miss friend Rizzuto Honourable dear him Pietro , a we dear will senators all man Senator was ,
 was Senator a all friend dear , man will Rizzuto , a and we Honourable . miss dear Pietro him senators ,
 a was dear , a and Senator man Honourable , , him will Pietro . senators all we dear Rizzuto friend miss
 , . and , Rizzuto all Honourable friend miss dear man him we was dear will Senator , senators Pietro a a
 Honourable dear will friend Pietro him , . Senator man dear all we senators , Rizzuto was , a miss a and
 friend man miss a Honourable will , Pietro him , all and dear we was senators Rizzuto Senator a , dear .
 we senators was man , . a Senator will all miss a , and , him Rizzuto dear Pietro friend dear Honourable
 , Honourable , and him miss man . all was we friend Rizzuto a Senator , dear Pietro senators a will dear
It was not clear that the entirety of these two groups were objecting. 
These are the two groups to which Senator Bolduc referred.  
There were certain spokespersons representing these groups. 
They were French-speaking Protestants and a smaller group of English-speaking Roman Catholics. 
The Catholics were represented by English-speaking priests.  
Again, in Senator Bolduc's thoughtful speech, he refers to these groups. 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, I regret to interrupt once again. 
The clock now says six o'clock.  
Senator Carstairs :
There is agreement that we will not see the clock, Your Honour.  
Senator Grafstein :
It is not clear to me whether these witnesses represented the entire spectrum of the groups for whom they spoke. 
Having said that, their rights are of concern.  
However, it is clear that denominational teaching will continue inside the province of Quebec by Quebec law.  
It is difficult to see how their accessibility to denominational teaching in the public school system will be abrogated in the short run. 
Obviously, it is no small solace, unlike the case for many years in the province of Ontario, that minority denominational rights, religious education, was achieved, in part, through public funding in the province of Quebec. In other words, as Senator Lavoie-Roux pointed out, in the province of Ontario there is and was no public funding of other religious or denominational schools, unlike Ontario. 
I want to make specific reference to this point because I have some personal experience in this regard. 
Access to public funding in Quebec for denominational education remains available in Quebec. 
I find it hard to believe how the Province of Quebec in the future, even if the notwithstanding clauses are removed, would not continue to fund denominational training. 
 Honourable senators , Senator Pietro Rizzuto was a dear man , a dear , and we will all miss him .
 will Pietro dear friend all we dear , Senator miss , man Rizzuto a a and him was . Honourable senators
 , all miss dear Senator him will was Rizzuto , senators a . man dear a we , Pietro and friend
 will friend , dear senators dear man all him a Senator Honourable miss and was . we a Rizzuto , ,
I extend my sincere sympathy to his family.  
 to . extend my sympathy I his sincere family
 his sympathy family . extend sincere my to I
 sympathy my sincere family I his extend to .
 my sympathy his family extend . I to sincere
 to I sympathy family extend his . sincere my
 his sincere sympathy I to . extend family my
 extend sympathy to his family my . sincere I
 sympathy . his family sincere to my extend I
 my to extend sympathy . family sincere I his
 to . sympathy his my I family sincere extend
 his family sincere sympathy I . to extend my
 to my extend I . family sincere sympathy his
 I . extend his family sincere sympathy my to
 I family sincere his . sympathy to my extend
 sincere his extend . family I to sympathy my
 his . to I family sincere extend my sympathy
Let us now look at the impact of the plan on jobs.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Your 15 minutes are up. 
Is leave granted to continue, honourable senators?  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
Senator Bolduc :
Honourable senators, clearly, we will be increasing the cost of jobs for businesses, and the cost of work for individuals. 
How can another payroll tax be positive for the creation of jobs? 
I would like an answer to this good question.  
Another question concerns the interprovincial competition that can be expected. 
It is obvious that the provinces which used to benefit from preferential rates from the federal fund will pay the going price in future. 
They will borrow, but at a higher rate. 
The increase in debt servicing costs will inflate each province's budget.  
As far as business investment is concerned, will the populations of the provinces agree to have their savings used for businesses in other provinces at the expense of their own? 
Will the provincial governments be tempted to influence the investment board to serve their interests? 
A moment ago I said that when a government agency, a public office, is created, there is a risk of politicizing the process.  
Participation in business, with such enormous amounts, cannot be limited to a few major companies - the Canadian market is not all that big - but will also extend to a multitude of medium-sized businesses. 
The available funding will be sufficient to invest in hundreds of medium-sized businesses. 
In Quebec, for example, if I remember correctly from its last report, the Caisse de dépôt already invests in almost 800 Quebec businesses.  
 I extend my sincere to his family .
 family my sympathy extend I to sincere his
 my to sympathy family extend sincere his .
 . extend sincere to his my I family
Hon. Jerahmiel S. Grafstein :
 Jerahmiel Grafstein . S Hon : .
 Jerahmiel Grafstein S . . Hon :
 S : Jerahmiel . Hon Grafstein .
 : Grafstein S Jerahmiel . Hon .
 Jerahmiel Grafstein . : . S Hon
 : Jerahmiel Hon . Grafstein S .
 . Grafstein Hon Jerahmiel . S :
 Grafstein : S Hon . . Jerahmiel
 . . S : Hon Jerahmiel Grafstein
 Jerahmiel : Hon . Grafstein S .
 S : . Jerahmiel Hon Grafstein .
 . Jerahmiel . Hon S Grafstein :
 . . : Hon Grafstein S Jerahmiel
 : . S Jerahmiel . Grafstein Hon
 Grafstein : S . . Hon Jerahmiel
 Jerahmiel : Grafstein . Hon . S
I did not say disasters did not happen in the private sector. 
Senator Gigantès :
It is not a big deal if you have $3 million, but it is if you lose $35,000 or $70,000 and this is all the money you have. 
It may not be a big deal for you, but it is for small investors.  
Senator Bolduc :
Honourable senators, I never said there would not be any damage in the private sector. 
Some damage is done every day. 
But it is the private sector. 
What you are doing with this bill is giving enormous powers to a few people with money belonging to all Canadians, particularly the poor. 
It is serious because we do not know how long this will last. 
Bills at second reading are always good measures. 
I saw more than my share in 40 years. 
Ministers come up with their legislation and they promise miracles. 
Three years later we take stock and discover that things are not like they were supposed to be. 
The minister's comments do not have nearly the same impact after three years.  
I am not saying everything is managed perfectly in the private sector, but I will tell you that it is the people's own money. 
It is not public money. 
No one is forced to invest in Royal Trust.  
Senator Gigantès :
The public is made up of individuals. 
 Hon . Jerahmiel . Grafstein :
 . Hon Jerahmiel : Grafstein .
 S . Jerahmiel : Grafstein .
 Hon : . S Jerahmiel Grafstein
Honourable senators, I sat next to Pietro Rizzuto in this chamber for close to a decade, and at practically every session we exchanged our views. 
 Rizzuto practically , a this decade at for next our views Pietro close I . to senators in every and Honourable chamber we session to sat exchanged ,
 practically and session decade to to . sat next every a Rizzuto exchanged close in Honourable for we views at I our , , chamber Pietro senators this
 practically for every senators session Pietro . this we chamber I next a at and in our exchanged close , decade views to sat to Honourable , Rizzuto
 Pietro a chamber , Honourable exchanged every sat to in . Rizzuto , and decade to senators for our at session we views close I practically this next
 exchanged our decade this and at session I chamber we . Honourable to every views for close Pietro sat , practically next a in Rizzuto senators , to
 in our Rizzuto we exchanged close a senators session for , decade chamber every to views Pietro at I next , Honourable sat and . practically to this
 Pietro views close at Rizzuto sat exchanged for we I . every this to senators next in and session decade Honourable our , practically to a chamber ,
 next every sat to in . practically senators a and at , Rizzuto exchanged decade chamber I Pietro this we views our to , session Honourable close for
 to , views decade senators we Pietro next at every close chamber in a , this session . sat Rizzuto our practically I Honourable for to exchanged and
 I next , decade senators in session our chamber Pietro views , and Rizzuto to practically sat for . close every to Honourable a this we at exchanged
 and at . senators sat we decade practically to every this close next to in Pietro a our , session , exchanged chamber views Honourable I Rizzuto for
 a exchanged , to every for we Honourable views sat senators close this in chamber next I practically session and Rizzuto our Pietro to decade , at .
 this . exchanged in every for Pietro chamber we views at to I Honourable , session and Rizzuto decade a next , to close sat our practically senators
 decade in Pietro , chamber practically , for . to exchanged session every a this we at views sat our senators next Honourable Rizzuto and close I to
 in I sat to and we chamber close this practically to . at , , decade for session senators Rizzuto a every Pietro next exchanged our Honourable views
 to views our senators Rizzuto Pietro to at close sat practically this decade , chamber for session in exchanged we I every and . , Honourable next a
Even the Liberals can do that.  
The government is unable to manage the present program so it wants more money to enable it to manage it better. 
We must remember that the author of Bill C-2 is Paul Martin. 
Paul Martin is a real smart guy. 
We remember that he had to stoop to bribing three Atlantic provinces, with other people's money, to fulfil his promises of harmonization. 
He later apologized to the Canadian people for misinforming them.  
Meanwhile, the Prime Minister and Deputy Prime Minister, Sheila Copps, were promising to get rid of the GST, but they did not really mean it, they said, although they were caught out on tape not telling the truth.  
Paul Martin promised in the old Red Book that the government would cancel the helicopter purchase and use the money to pay for more social programs. 
Now, $900 million later, we have no helicopters that fly safely. 
He penned the Red Book to renegotiate the free trade agreement. 
He took all the kudos after the 1993 election.  
Now he says: "Rush Bill C-2. 
Trust me." 
The minister says that he needs the bill now to satisfy an agreement with the provinces. 
I have heard of no agreement. 
No one here has heard of an agreement. 
If someone on the other side knows of an agreement, please tell me.  
We have not heard one province asking us to abandon our parliamentary responsibilities and rush this bill through by January 1 on the threat that they will cancel their agreement. 
The Minister of Finance is rushing so that he can get another $400 million in taxes for the 1997 tax year. 
The brunt of this bill is being borne by middle- and lower-income workers.  
 Honourable senators , I sat next to Pietro Rizzuto in this chamber for close to a decade , and at practically every session exchanged our views .
 senators session , every I . a chamber for this at close we to , Honourable exchanged and to sat our practically in decade Rizzuto Pietro next
 we sat chamber Honourable , decade exchanged close senators every Pietro a I Rizzuto practically , to our next at session in this and views for .
 at exchanged in session chamber , practically views close to , this senators to our Honourable a Rizzuto for I every . Pietro sat we and decade
Pietro most of all believed in loyalty. 
 all most . Pietro believed loyalty of in
 Pietro believed most of . in loyalty all
 believed loyalty of Pietro most in . all
 Pietro . most all in believed of loyalty
 loyalty of Pietro most all in believed .
 in of Pietro most believed loyalty . all
 . believed Pietro most all loyalty of in
 . in most believed loyalty all of Pietro
 most . in of Pietro loyalty all believed
 in most loyalty believed Pietro . of all
 believed loyalty most Pietro . of in all
 loyalty all . Pietro most believed of in
 of most in loyalty Pietro all . believed
 loyalty all of believed . Pietro most in
 loyalty believed . all of Pietro most in
 all believed Pietro . in most loyalty of
However, on cross examination - and this is the value of the committee hearings - their interest was not so much in opposing section 93. 
Rather, their interest was focused on the failure of section 23(1)( a ) of the Charter to be proclaimed in Quebec. 
As Senator Lynch-Staunton put it so well, it means that there are in effect two classes in Quebec as it presently pertains. 
If you are English speaking and you come from outside of Canada, your children will be streamed by the Quebec government into the French-language stream. 
That is unfair. 
They are not without some type of relief and I will address that later.  
However, this is an issue of linguistic rights. 
Here the question is not of linguistic rights but denominational privileges.  
In cross-examining Alliance Quebec, it was clear that they did not oppose the amendments to section 93 but rather the enforcement of section 23(1)( a ). Section 23(1)( a ) requires a proclamation by the Province of Quebec, and a declaration of this proclamation is, of course, not within federal powers. 
We gave that up in 1982.  
Senator Pitfield knows this well. 
He was an architect of the Constitution Act, 1982. 
It is clearly within the four corners of the assembly of Quebec to proclaim, if it chooses, section 23(1)( a ). Many of us are unhappy with this aspect of section 23(1)( a ). Students in over 13,000 families have been precluded from entering the English stream because the Province of Quebec has refused to proclaim section 23(1)( a ). 
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Who put it in?  
Senator Grafstein :
Rather, they wished to use this opportunity to leverage the Government of Quebec to proclaim section 23(1)( a ). This the Quebec government was clearly not prepared to do.  
The second group, the aboriginal groups within Quebec, claimed that this resolution detrimentally affected their rights. 
The report makes clear - and we came to this conclusion aided and abetted by legal advice and statements by both Quebec and federal ministers - that aboriginal rights were in no way, shape or form, affected by this resolution. 
We said so in the report.  
 Pietro most of believed in loyalty .
 in . of most believed loyalty all
 most loyalty in . all of Pietro
 most . believed of in loyalty Pietro
He was loyal to his friends; he was loyal to his leader; he was loyal to our party. 
 leader he loyal to ; loyal his party to our his was was friends he He to . was loyal ;
 he loyal party to . his was to he leader loyal ; loyal was our his He to friends was ;
 was was he leader was ; loyal he loyal to loyal his . ; party friends He his to our to
 our to was he loyal party his leader was ; to his ; friends loyal was He loyal he to .
 to loyal to was was to party he ; ; he loyal our . friends leader was He his his loyal
 loyal party to ; loyal was his he loyal . was friends to was our to He leader his ; he
 friends loyal to to loyal . party our ; ; He was he he was his his leader was loyal to
 leader party he was was ; He to to ; loyal to friends loyal was our his . loyal his he
 party loyal his He he ; ; friends leader our to was loyal he was his to to loyal was .
 loyal loyal . ; he He his to to our party was leader was he friends to loyal his ; was
 was his to . he loyal he party our to to loyal was leader He was ; ; loyal his friends
 loyal to his he loyal party our ; his loyal ; to friends to was was leader was He . he
 He loyal was he to ; he loyal friends . to leader was loyal ; his party was our his to
 he to he to his friends his was loyal was party leader to our He loyal . ; was ; loyal
 he loyal was our he . ; to party to ; friends was He his loyal to loyal was leader his
 our He to ; his his loyal to he was to he friends was was loyal ; leader . party loyal
(2) A proclamation under subsection (1) shall be issued only where authorized by the legislative assembly or government of Quebec. 
Section 23(1)( a ), from which Quebec is exempted by the authors of the Constitution Act themselves, requires that Canadian citizens: 
Finally, I want to comment on the notion of joint committees, particularly those charged with studying a particular item within a given period. 
It was said here, and repeated before the committee, that participation by the Senate must not be interpreted as an abandonment by it of the obligations imposed on the Senate in matters of constitutional amendments. 
It is true that, alone, we cannot defeat an amendment of this nature, as the Senate may be overruled by the House of Commons. 
However, as was shown in the case of the first Term 17 resolution, although the Senate impact on a constitutional amendment is limited, its efforts in this regard can be most constructive. 
I am convinced that if the amendments to it, which the Senate forwarded to the House, had been accepted, Parliament would not be faced with a second Term 17 resolution as it is now, as the Senate amendments satisfied the affected minorities while respecting the Government of Newfoundland's objectives.  
The joint committee was not given enough time to review the Quebec resolution with the care it deserved. 
Witnesses were impressive in numbers, but time restrictions affected their presentations, and questions and answers were too often incomplete when they were not cut short. 
Joint committees of this sort benefit the government, not Parliament, as they are limited in both latitude and independence by the government's control over their agenda. 
This is not meant as a reflection on the work done by the co-chairmen or those who participated on the committee, who I again thank for their excellent work, in particular the co-chairmen, for they toiled under difficult circumstances. 
It is a comment on the concept itself and one, I gather, which can also be applied to the joint committee which has just completed its study of the proposed amendment to Term 17.  
Should joint committees become the rule rather than the exception, and two-thirds of the membership is drawn from the House of Commons, how can one expect sober second thought to win even persuasive arguments? 
That is why it is essential that a constitutional amendment be thoroughly reviewed by the Senate, otherwise we will be party to the Commons always having its will on us.  
The following, taken from the joint committee report, was not included as an afterthought, I can assure honourable senators: 
Sixteen Members of the House of Commons, and seven Senators, were named to this Special Joint Committee. 
Some of those Senators have stated that their participation in the Committee must in no way be seen as absolving them, or their Senate colleagues, from the Senate's constitutional obligation to assess any amendment proposed to the Constitution of Canada.  
I am already hearing cries of alarm from those who will claim that the Senate, by adopting this attitude, will cause a delay which could compromise the reforms the Government of Quebec has in mind. 
I would like to remind those with such concerns that the reforms are already happening, are far advanced even, and do not need amendment of section 93 to reach their conclusion.  
The amendment to section 93 will do away with the confessional school boards and the dissentient boards only, and these will have to stay in place until the end of the current academic year early next summer.  
 He was loyal to his friends ; he was loyal to his leader ; he was loyal to our party
 . was friends his to leader was party his He to he ; loyal loyal was to ; loyal our
 friends to his party ; was He to . ; loyal to was he loyal our his he was loyal
 his to was leader He friends loyal was ; ; his loyal he our loyal . was party to he
He was, for me, the ultimate loyalist.  
 , me loyalist , the for was . ultimate He
 ultimate for the . He loyalist was , me ,
 ultimate He was loyalist me , for , the .
 , ultimate , the me He loyalist for was .
 , was , for the ultimate me He loyalist .
 the , He . was me for , ultimate loyalist
 for , , loyalist me was the ultimate . He
 . ultimate me loyalist , was He for , the
 ultimate . was loyalist , the for He , me
 for loyalist was ultimate . me He , the ,
 He ultimate , for me , the loyalist . was
 for He , loyalist the ultimate me . , was
 ultimate was me , He for loyalist . the ,
 the , for loyalist ultimate , me was He .
 me was , for the He loyalist , . ultimate
 , the ultimate was , loyalist me He for .
Your Committee, to which was referred the Bill C-10, Act to implement a convention between Canada and Sweden, a convention between Canada and the Republic of Kazakhstan, a convention between Canada and the Republic of Iceland and a convention between Canada and the Kingdom of Denmark for the avoidance of double taxation and the prevention of fiscal evasion with respect to taxes on income and to amend the Canada-Netherlands Income Tax Convention Act, 1986 and the Canada-United States Tax Convention Act, 1984, has examined the said Bill in obedience to its Order of Reference dated December 8, 1997, and now reports the same without amendment.  
Respectfully submitted, 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this bill be read the third time?  
On motion of Senator Kirby, bill placed on the Orders of the Day for third reading at the next sitting of the Senate.  
Present State and Future of Agriculture 
Report of Agriculture and Forestry Committee Tabled 
Hon. Leonard J. Gustafson :
Honourable senators, I have the honour to table the second report of the Standing Senate Committee on Agriculture and Forestry, which requests that the committee be empowered to incur special expenses pursuant to the Procedural Guidelines for the Financial Operation of Senate Committees .  
I ask that this report be printed as an appendix to the Journals of the Senate of this day.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is it agreed, honourable senators?  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this report be taken into consideration?  
On motion of Senator Gustafson, report placed on the Orders the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate.  
Present State and Future of Forestry 
Report of Agriculture and Forestry Committee Tabled 
Hon. Leonard J. Gustafson :
 He was , me , the ultimate loyalist .
 He loyalist ultimate . for was the , ,
 loyalist for me was . the , , He
 me the , ultimate , was . loyalist for
At his moving and magnificent memorial service in Laval-sur-le-Lac this summer, five languages were spoken and sung - Latin, English, French, Italian and Spanish - for he was so closely and so strongly rooted in each of those cultures. 
 Lac of - moving this Spanish le Laval was languages five sung were closely so so , and Latin each his At spoken - those in memorial rooted in English magnificent . and , for cultures , - and - summer he French Italian sur strongly service , and -
 strongly Latin closely Italian Laval rooted of in - sung those each were English , magnificent and - languages summer so in was for moving and Spanish le and this At and , service , he five his Lac - . spoken so cultures sur memorial - - French ,
 he le Spanish magnificent spoken - French five Lac closely were sung in and cultures for service sur and moving At - Italian strongly memorial each this , Laval of summer in so English those Latin - . and , was and , - so languages , - his rooted
 those sur in sung was Lac were and . for - Italian cultures in moving strongly , magnificent spoken Spanish memorial , and English , - service Laval of - closely his and le Latin five and this , languages so so - summer each At he rooted French -
 French , were those - this Italian At . English summer and rooted magnificent each - , he Spanish so his for strongly cultures , spoken and - service sung of - was memorial Laval le sur moving languages Latin Lac closely and , and in in five - so
 Lac - and Laval was French moving . in he sur summer and memorial for - in those languages Italian , rooted his - strongly spoken English le cultures magnificent At so - , of and each Latin and so were five this , Spanish sung , service - closely
 Latin each this for spoken sung le rooted , and memorial , cultures - closely in , he and English service sur magnificent , and Laval Italian so five languages At moving French so was - those Lac were his of and - . in - - summer Spanish strongly
 those , French was memorial Italian English - cultures and le . Laval Latin of this for he Spanish - five languages sur rooted in magnificent summer spoken At Lac , - , his service strongly and so , - so each moving in sung and - closely and were
 he - strongly spoken - - rooted , memorial , . Spanish English magnificent so of in closely in sur and and Lac Latin those - Laval - for French , Italian were and , le this so was service At his cultures and sung each moving languages five summer
 - each and those Latin cultures summer - , - for moving he Laval closely five - , in rooted Spanish so , languages of magnificent sung , and were French sur spoken service Italian . le memorial strongly and Lac this was At English and - his so in
 sur five - each Italian memorial moving so , , for Spanish - and service summer le cultures was closely Lac rooted he and , At spoken , magnificent of were so - his in English French . and languages and those strongly in Latin - sung - Laval this
 each and and spoken rooted , were closely magnificent - was Latin . those in - le five and Lac - Laval - Spanish he service , English summer At and sung Italian in , sur this moving - memorial so of for so , his French strongly languages cultures
 each Italian this Lac , so Latin and - five he English and rooted in sung , - , - moving - was - memorial spoken of languages for magnificent summer service and strongly those and were so Laval his At cultures in French le sur . closely , Spanish
 and this Italian languages . cultures Latin Laval five those his magnificent English spoken closely for of was and summer sung so so he and - memorial , , Spanish moving strongly , - sur rooted were , - - each - le in service At in Lac French and
 French , in spoken so - Spanish - rooted Laval At were so summer those . his sung closely sur le Lac , cultures English moving for magnificent and - strongly Italian , Latin this and - service memorial - , each and in five he and of languages was
 . - magnificent memorial those were of for - , le , each sur service Spanish so spoken rooted , was Laval summer and Latin so At - this he - Lac and sung languages strongly his in cultures , five and in Italian closely - English and French moving
The regulations governing investments and the behaviour of administrators have not been revealed. 
They are not ready. 
What guidelines will there be for administrators? 
A parliamentary review is therefore vital before their implementation.  
In concluding, I would say to the government that the preferable alternative to its bill would be to simply oblige everyone in the labour force in Canada to invest a percentage of their savings in funds under private management or let government assume its role by providing a safety net for those who could not set aside enough money for their old age.  
Here is an intelligent response to the challenge before us. 
However, and it is regrettable in this era of the welfare state, it seems to me that we prefer to make sweeping rules that apply to everyone in order to resolve the problem of a few.  
Hon. Philippe Deane Gigantès :
You talk with admiration of private investment management. 
How do you explain the disaster at Olympia & York, for example, under the management of Mr. Eyton, our colleague, and the fact that major players like Conrad Black closed Dominion Stores and took the money Dominion Stores employees had invested in a pension fund, a fund they never drew from? 
Are you telling us that the private sector will be more generous and wise than the Caisse de dépôt in Quebec? 
Senator Bolduc :
I did not say disasters did not happen in the private sector. 
Senator Gigantès :
It is not a big deal if you have $3 million, but it is if you lose $35,000 or $70,000 and this is all the money you have. 
It may not be a big deal for you, but it is for small investors.  
Senator Bolduc :
Honourable senators, I never said there would not be any damage in the private sector. 
Some damage is done every day. 
But it is the private sector. 
 At his moving and magnificent memorial service in Laval - sur - le - Lac this summer , five languages were spoken and sung - Latin , English , French , and Spanish - for he was so closely and so strongly rooted in each of those cultures .
 English Italian and - moving for his Lac strongly , - he and Spanish sur and - spoken - le summer each in magnificent memorial closely At Latin those , so French so five rooted , and Laval , was service of were sung cultures - in . this
 was French each of his le cultures Lac , languages magnificent , , in - Laval rooted Latin , - - English service At and Italian he - five Spanish moving memorial so strongly this those were spoken for sung and sur closely and - so in summer and
 sur of magnificent , memorial he his strongly those - - in , - cultures and and and so , were summer spoken this - Lac French Laval rooted At . so moving Latin - Spanish sung for , closely languages le in five was service Italian each English
As we listened to the beautiful operatic voices and music that Pietro loved so much, we could see and feel his presence among us. 
 so us see beautiful his , listened presence and feel to As could that much among we operatic Pietro music the voices and . we loved
 , operatic listened could Pietro the us among that much music so presence voices his . we feel and see we beautiful and As loved to
 , the among could and . loved beautiful us see presence we music that we operatic his listened to voices Pietro and feel much As so
 and we among we , to so and loved listened see much . As music Pietro that could operatic presence voices his beautiful the feel us
 . much and so could voices his see listened to among beautiful , we Pietro As and us operatic we feel music the presence that loved
 could operatic presence his us the , among As so music and see to that listened Pietro and we beautiful much voices feel loved we .
 and Pietro among operatic much that see and we his we the presence to . , music voices As feel us loved could listened so beautiful
 we Pietro could that listened see we presence his voices loved and As so and us feel beautiful the music . operatic much , among to
 that feel beautiful could loved much to operatic his we and so we among presence . the voices and listened , As see us music Pietro
 among voices us his . could , As so much the that operatic beautiful loved we to presence feel listened see Pietro music and and we
 voices beautiful to us his could loved we operatic listened Pietro and that see music much and so , presence we the feel . As among
 see loved As presence and so beautiful us much we music . among feel , could Pietro and voices his operatic the we to listened that
 to , much presence could . us we and loved Pietro and we feel his among the listened beautiful see music operatic so that As voices
 music . and voices As could Pietro see much and so we beautiful the to presence among we operatic feel that us listened loved , his
 beautiful the operatic presence could much voices us we music among loved and feel so we and listened see . to Pietro As his that ,
 and so we , feel beautiful could we voices and the see operatic much that loved . his presence us to As Pietro music among listened
Bill read first time.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
When shall this bill be read the second time?  
On motion of Senator Carstairs, bill placed on Orders of the Day for second reading on Thursday next, December 11, 1997.  
Bill to Amend-Second Reading-Motions in Amendment-Debate Adjourned to Await Ruling of Speaker 
On the Order: 
Resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Moore, seconded by the Honourable Senator Ferretti Barth, for the second reading of Bill C-16, An Act to amend the Criminal Code and the interpretation Act (powers to arrest and enter dwellings), 
And on the motion in amendment of the Honourable Senator Cools, seconded by the Honourable Senator Sparrow, that the motion be amended by deleting all the words after "That" and substituting the following therefor: 
"Bill C-16, An Act to amend the Criminal Code and the Interpretation Act (powers to arrest and enter dwellings), be not now read a second time because 
( a ) the Senate is opposed to the principle of a bill which has been placed before Parliament as a result of the judgment of the Supreme Court of Canada of May 22, 1997, and of the Court's Orders of June 27 and November 19, 1997; 
( b ) the Senate finds it repugnant that the Supreme Court is infringing on the sovereign rights of Parliament to enact legislation and is failing to respect the constitutional comity between the courts and Parliament; and 
( c ) the Court is in effect coercing Parliament by threatening chaotic consequences respecting law enforcement and arrests if Parliament does not pass this bill."  
Hon. Orville H. Phillips :
Honourable senators, I had adjourned the debate but I understand Senator Wood wishes to speak.  
Hon. Dalia Wood :
Honourable senators, I rise to speak in support of Senator Cools's amendment. 
The amendment, described as a reasoned amendment, is a parliamentary device which allows a member to raise concerns and opposition to the principles of a bill. 
The public's emerging concern with judicial activism, particularly in the area of criminal law, is compelling our interest and study. 
An example of this concern may be found in a December letter to The Ottawa Citizen . 
We should be mindful of these growing questions and concerns.  
 As we listened to the beautiful operatic voices and music that Pietro loved so much , we could see and his presence among us .
 voices his , and that music the . we and operatic could among Pietro As see much us we to beautiful loved so listened presence
 and music us voices loved feel As among that operatic Pietro we listened so to could the his we . beautiful much see and ,
 music his voices feel see us , to and we among that listened we operatic much so As could beautiful the . Pietro loved presence
It was, honourable senators, a most fitting conclusion and tribute to an outstanding career of public and community service.  
 community to honourable most a conclusion and outstanding of , It senators was career public service an fitting tribute . , and
 most community service and was tribute It outstanding . to public an career and , of conclusion a senators , fitting honourable
 fitting outstanding to honourable public . tribute a It and most career of and conclusion , service was senators community an ,
 It tribute and service public , most , community . a of was conclusion fitting and career honourable to senators outstanding an
 senators . honourable to tribute fitting service , an , career community outstanding and and most public of was conclusion It a
 most an to a honourable , fitting community and , was career tribute It of conclusion outstanding public . service senators and
 tribute most and public a , fitting . to career honourable senators and of service conclusion was outstanding , It community an
 , public honourable most of and It outstanding senators . service an to and a was fitting , community tribute conclusion career
 career senators of . fitting , public service to It and was honourable conclusion an most and tribute outstanding , a community
 , an conclusion most . to It fitting senators , a and community public outstanding tribute service career honourable of and was
 outstanding and of an most service a It public , fitting . tribute to , senators community career and was honourable conclusion
 most conclusion senators , public . to tribute and It outstanding an honourable fitting of career service was , and a community
 was a an most to honourable . , and community public outstanding It service and career , fitting senators of conclusion tribute
 most , , honourable fitting a career an and . conclusion and to public tribute service community outstanding of It senators was
 honourable outstanding , was a conclusion , community It of public service most senators . fitting career and and an to tribute
 service was fitting community honourable , a and conclusion public of and to career senators an . tribute , most outstanding It
Linguistic School Boards-Motion to Amend Section 93 of Constitution-Debate Adjourned 
Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration 
Sixth Report of Committee Adopted 
Bill to Amend-First Reading 
Canada Marine Bill 
First Reading 
Aboriginal Peoples 
Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples-Committee Authorized to Study Recommendations 
THE SENATE 
Tuesday, December 9, 1997 
The Senate met at 2:00 p.m., the Speaker in the Chair.  
Prayers.  
Pages Exchange Program with House of Commons 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, before I call for Senators' Statements, I should like to introduce the two pages who are with us this week through the exchange program with the House of Commons.  
They are Anne McCulluch of Calgary, Alberta, who is pursuing studies in journalism at Carleton University.  
Kirk Nangreaves of Saint-Hubert, Quebec, is studying at the University of Ottawa Arts Faculty.  
He is majoring in psychology.  
On behalf of all senators and the Senate, I bid you welcome.  
SENATORS' STATEMENTS 
 It was , honourable senators , a fitting conclusion and tribute to an outstanding career of public and community service .
 fitting . conclusion outstanding was honourable It and service career community of and an public a to , , tribute senators
 outstanding most of career and public , . a honourable , was fitting community an conclusion service tribute senators It and
 and conclusion fitting . service a senators , to most , honourable of public It was outstanding tribute and community career
To his wife, Pina, and his family, what can we offer except our condolences and our memories.  
 , wife , and condolences what offer To our his our Pina , memories his except . can family and we
 Pina our , wife family To his memories we , can except and his , what . our condolences and offer
 family offer we and . and except his our can , our what Pina , To wife condolences memories , his
 our our condolences his can and . except Pina , we memories , family what and wife To offer his ,
 To memories we wife , . , can his offer , our except family his and Pina our condolences what and
 memories , his his family wife our and To can offer and what . , Pina we , condolences except our
 condolences offer wife , his except Pina memories and , our what and our , To his we . can family
 . memories we what wife condolences To , can his our , our family offer his and , Pina and except
 , . offer family our we can what except wife , Pina condolences his our To his and , memories and
 . condolences , memories , his except wife our family , and can his offer what Pina we our To and
 , family his his what . except To our and Pina and wife our , can , memories we condolences offer
 we his can what family condolences our . wife and and Pina except memories our , offer his , , To
 what , and condolences memories can his , . and our our Pina except wife offer To , family we his
 , memories we , and To Pina and can , condolences wife his what . our our offer except family his
 To can and we our what . and , memories our , family Pina except condolences wife his offer , his
 offer can family what . , and condolences wife we his our except memories , , Pina his and To our
Tuesday, December 9, 1997 
The Standing Senate Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce has the honour to present its 
SIXTH REPORT 
Your Committee, to which was referred the Bill C-10, Act to implement a convention between Canada and Sweden, a convention between Canada and the Republic of Kazakhstan, a convention between Canada and the Republic of Iceland and a convention between Canada and the Kingdom of Denmark for the avoidance of double taxation and the prevention of fiscal evasion with respect to taxes on income and to amend the Canada-Netherlands Income Tax Convention Act, 1986 and the Canada-United States Tax Convention Act, 1984, has examined the said Bill in obedience to its Order of Reference dated December 8, 1997, and now reports the same without amendment.  
Respectfully submitted, 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this bill be read the third time?  
On motion of Senator Kirby, bill placed on the Orders of the Day for third reading at the next sitting of the Senate.  
Present State and Future of Agriculture 
Report of Agriculture and Forestry Committee Tabled 
Hon. Leonard J. Gustafson :
Honourable senators, I have the honour to table the second report of the Standing Senate Committee on Agriculture and Forestry, which requests that the committee be empowered to incur special expenses pursuant to the Procedural Guidelines for the Financial Operation of Senate Committees .  
I ask that this report be printed as an appendix to the Journals of the Senate of this day.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is it agreed, honourable senators?  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this report be taken into consideration?  
On motion of Senator Gustafson, report placed on the Orders the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate.  
 To his wife , Pina , and his family , what can we offer except condolences and our memories .
 , we Pina memories condolences . except and To what and his our can , offer wife our family ,
 we condolences our and , Pina , wife family his can . except offer , his our what memories and
 we , our what . wife family his , condolences offer his can and our , and To except Pina
Pietro will be sorely missed for his strength, his sensibility, his sagacity and, above all, for his service to Canada, which he loved so very much. 
 he Pietro be so his will sorely his much , which sagacity Canada , . above to , strength loved very and sensibility his for for , service missed , all his
 loved his , missed his sorely will Pietro service strength for sensibility very to all his , so much Canada be his , and for sagacity , . he which , above
 missed , . sagacity Canada for sensibility his so his to above sorely and he , strength service all his , , which loved much his will for be Pietro very ,
 Pietro and to sagacity very , , for he strength sensibility his his , missed sorely , , his loved much above all be which will so Canada his for . service
 , his , sorely much Pietro very for above will he and Canada strength , loved , his be for so missed sagacity sensibility service his to . his which , all
 much so and missed which , for he will his Canada , loved Pietro sagacity , strength service to , his very sensibility above be his for all his sorely . ,
 sensibility service much . missed very , will he all loved for , , Canada his sorely for above and strength which Pietro his , his his so sagacity be , to
 for sensibility very , will all much , he missed Pietro his his above be which sagacity sorely and , , service Canada to so , his his strength loved for .
 very , sorely strength so be , his sensibility , he much sagacity his which above loved all missed to Pietro will his , for his service . Canada , and for
 and , very to for his for much strength loved , so he which Pietro be will service sorely missed his all sagacity Canada , , . sensibility his , his above
 which loved and above very his , for for he , will be , to Canada much missed strength , all Pietro his sensibility his so sorely service his , sagacity .
 much sensibility so . for , his sagacity his to service very , loved for his , be his Pietro above , missed Canada sorely will he and all , strength which
 , very above service sensibility he strength be his his to , all Canada and much , , Pietro . will sorely sagacity which missed his for , for so his loved
 very be , , , for sensibility and much loved sagacity his , . above , missed his his his strength Canada sorely so to Pietro service for all which he will
 service his his , very which sorely much his , he missed so all for and for his , . will to be sagacity , , strength Canada loved Pietro sensibility above
 for and above which very for sensibility strength . , so his Canada he sorely loved be Pietro much , missed his service his all , will his sagacity to , ,
I do not think it is correct, unless there is an urgency, for committees to sit at the same time as the chamber. 
This is not for appearances' sake, but because the work done here can often be as important in the debates as what goes on in committees. 
At various stages of our work - the introduction of bills, second reading, committee referral, then third reading - we are often doing several at the same time. 
Sometimes even two, three or four committees are sitting when we are sitting. 
That is an improper practice.  
If the deputy leader could guarantee to us that, on Wednesdays from now on - and we will strive to be cooperative - we will sit no later than 3:30 p.m., unless there is a proven urgency, then I think Senator Stewart's motion is in order. 
However, we need that assurance first.  
Senator Carstairs :
Let me assure the Leader and Deputy Leader of the Opposition that we will do everything on our part to ensure that sessions end on time. 
We did sit yesterday, which was a Monday. 
I can assure senators we will be sitting next Monday in order to fulfil the business of the chamber before the Christmas break.  
Senator Kinsella :
On that basis, I do not think leave is necessary.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is leave granted?  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
He just felt it was not necessary.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Leave is granted.  
Hon. Senators :
 Pietro will sorely missed for his strength , his sensibility , his sagacity and , above all , for his service to Canada , which he loved so very much .
 missed his for sensibility strength very Pietro loved and , be service his . Canada his sagacity for , , above , he which , so will his all much sorely
 , , , sagacity his sorely sensibility will be so service for his missed loved he which . above and much very for Pietro all to his strength Canada , his
 very his sagacity which all his above to and for strength Canada service much sorely be Pietro , so , sensibility , . , his he his will loved missed for
Pietro, pax vobiscum . 
 Pietro . , vobiscum pax
 . , pax Pietro vobiscum
 pax Pietro , vobiscum .
 vobiscum Pietro pax . ,
 , vobiscum pax Pietro .
 , . Pietro vobiscum pax
 . vobiscum , Pietro pax
 pax vobiscum Pietro , .
 pax . Pietro , vobiscum
 , pax Pietro . vobiscum
 pax , vobiscum . Pietro
 , . vobiscum Pietro pax
 . pax , Pietro vobiscum
 . pax vobiscum , Pietro
 pax , . Pietro vobiscum
 . Pietro pax vobiscum ,
The huge monopoly to be created presents a very high risk of inefficiency, of bad investments, and therefore of poor performance. 
Why should everyone be obliged to contribute, to provide funds to a manager who may do a worse job than the person who actually owns those funds?  
If some are deemed to have not done a good job, they are replaced, something is done about it.  
We are familiar with the virtues of competition in the private sector, which results in a raised level of performance. 
That is good for the consumer, so why would it not be applicable to this particular type of services?  
Analysis of investments, or the decision as to the choice of investment for a business, is a highly technical undertaking, but also a risky one. 
This is why, in all wisdom, we must not "put all our eggs in one basket," as the old saying goes. 
Ought we not to have a number of baskets instead, so that any one bad decision will not be a huge disaster?  
This diversification of investments is wise; ought it not to be institutionalized in the law, and ought not the number of independent responsibility centres for investments to be increased?  
My third point concerns the relationship between the government, the Minister of Finance in particular, and the agency in question. 
It will always be tempting to use these funds to finance governments, at lower rates than if it had been invested in the open market. 
That is, in fact, what has been done since 1996 under the present system. 
It must be ensured that a conflict of interest of this kind is not permitted at all. 
I will return to this shortly.  
My fourth point concerns investment policy. 
The law should provide that the administrators of the fund are responsible for ensuring contributors a reasonable pension, while providing them with the best return, that is, the safest and best return possible.  
Canada's economy represents about 2.5 per cent of the world economy. 
So it would be wise to permit the fund not only to diversify its investments in stocks and bonds but also to invest worldwide. 
Diversification of values, in a variety of instruments, in various sectors, in different countries and currencies is thus a measure of wisdom and judgement to be left to those in charge, who must, of course, be accountable for their actions.  
Honourable senators, it would be tempting for the administrators to act as investors on occasion by investing in all sorts of businesses with their judgement either arbitrary or verging on patronage. 
 Pietro , vobiscum .
 . vobiscum pax Pietro
 . , vobiscum pax
 vobiscum , Pietro pax
Hon. Lise Bacon :
 : Hon Lise . Bacon
 Hon Bacon : . Lise
 Hon Bacon Lise . :
 : Hon . Lise Bacon
 : Bacon Lise . Hon
 Bacon . Hon : Lise
 Hon : Lise . Bacon
 Bacon : . Hon Lise
 Bacon : Hon . Lise
 . : Hon Lise Bacon
 Lise . Bacon : Hon
 . Lise Hon : Bacon
 Bacon Hon . Lise :
 . Lise : Hon Bacon
 : Lise . Bacon Hon
 . : Bacon Hon Lise
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this report be taken into consideration?  
On motion of Senator Rompkey, report placed on the Orders of the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate.  
ADJOURNMENT 
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58(1) h ), I move, seconded by the Honourable Senator De Bané: 
That when the Senate adjourns today, it do stand adjourned until tomorrow, Wednesday, December 10, 1997, at 1:30 p.m. 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is leave granted, honourable senators?  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
Motion agreed to.  
International Assembly of French-Speaking Parliamentarians 
Meeting held in Luxembourg-Report of Canadian Section Tabled 
Hon. Pierre De Bané :
Honourable senators, pursuant to rule 23(6) of the Senate, I have the honour to present, in both official languages, the reports of the Canadian section of the International Assembly of French-Speaking Parliamentarians as well as the financial report of the 23rd regular session of the IAFSP and its executive committee, held in Luxembourg from July 7 to July 10, 1997.  
Foreign Affairs 
Committee Authorized to Meet During Sitting of the Senate 
Hon. John B. Stewart :
Honourable senators, with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58(1)( a ), I move: 
 Hon . Lise :
 . Lise Hon :
 . Hon Bacon Lise
 Bacon : Hon .
Honourable senators, much has been written and said, but today I would like to tell you about a friend who passed away on August 3, a friend for whom I had the greatest respect, as did most of you in this house, I am sure.  
 sure in am , tell did the has this respect friend August on you who passed about I for written a of . friend today Honourable had most , a , I house 3 senators as would away but been , I greatest whom you to and much , said like
 did been Honourable you said but written whom away I , , this today I a tell senators respect on , of and am I , would passed had , has you friend most house about August as the for sure friend much 3 like greatest . in who a to
 respect friend today would the tell did much I of Honourable as , friend had passed sure been written who a , on , you I whom to in am I has this senators , away . most 3 about a like said and , greatest but house you for August
 I am like today as , whom , , about 3 for I I , to August . much on house a who passed most a has the written in Honourable of said you friend would senators sure but been greatest had you respect friend tell did , away and this
 , who for , today I to am house passed 3 you . of I , most as been in the written on respect , Honourable much away tell sure but had a whom friend August about friend senators did and a greatest , this has you like said would I
 for in of has like much friend today the on passed , . tell , about I and you senators , you whom house most , I a written this as 3 who been a to did sure respect , would but August said friend greatest I Honourable had away am
 like a had I to greatest as away , on has , , would been am about , and a this sure said friend 3 house did August but much whom respect written I you who of friend in for most the today , you Honourable senators . passed I tell
 whom like , of a . friend as senators did friend tell greatest I much written passed the , about who house am Honourable said would you most on had for has I 3 , I and August sure away been to today a but you in respect this , ,
 respect much written would the a whom , in for , I August sure and a of , greatest , I said as . 3 senators you but this on tell about Honourable who , passed house to did like friend I been today you most am has away friend had
 today you friend house I said , for senators you in been , I greatest am friend , who would a has did respect sure of I a to as whom , passed about away tell the like had this on August much . Honourable , written 3 and but most
 has respect greatest friend I Honourable who you I 3 to , about passed did been of August tell for said . a I this you on whom sure , had senators in , away friend today and as but am the like a much written most , house would ,
 house whom the a said I 3 for about August did like senators this friend respect I am sure friend Honourable but you on away as in and been I , . , , had would today you greatest , much to most has of who written passed tell a ,
 but about senators like sure most passed the and I had has on I this greatest friend 3 much did Honourable written respect as whom would for a house , been I , today in am a , you of you tell who said . , August away , to friend
 as the about been August for greatest away written in had , senators on , like would to , Honourable , friend , who sure respect you tell I I am but . a you has said much I most this a of 3 and today passed did house whom friend
 respect had a am I about would for has in tell whom August Honourable but to did written a . senators , friend on , the 3 I greatest as most who , today been house away you I said passed you much and like , this of sure , friend
 away friend in August , to house would and today a of most I friend , , I the had , like am been but about written has you as I . 3 for sure tell whom on greatest , said who respect a you this passed much Honourable did senators
Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples-Committee Authorized to Study Recommendations 
THE SENATE 
Tuesday, December 9, 1997 
The Senate met at 2:00 p.m., the Speaker in the Chair.  
Prayers.  
Pages Exchange Program with House of Commons 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, before I call for Senators' Statements, I should like to introduce the two pages who are with us this week through the exchange program with the House of Commons.  
They are Anne McCulluch of Calgary, Alberta, who is pursuing studies in journalism at Carleton University.  
Kirk Nangreaves of Saint-Hubert, Quebec, is studying at the University of Ottawa Arts Faculty.  
He is majoring in psychology.  
On behalf of all senators and the Senate, I bid you welcome.  
SENATORS' STATEMENTS 
The Senate 
Response to Newspaper Article on Senator's Residency Qualifications 
Hon. Colin Kenny :
Honourable senators, I rise today on behalf of a colleague who cannot be present, Senator Paul Lucier. 
Senator Lucier has sent me a fax which he has asked me to communicate to the chamber. 
For your benefit, he wants me to reply to the comments made about him in the media recently.  
He writes: 
 Honourable senators , much has been written and said , but today I would like to tell you about a friend who passed away on August 3 , a friend for whom I had the greatest respect , as did most you in this house , I am sure .
 house and am did but who has said on August you today as of friend you I for friend Honourable much passed , had , respect , about to been , the written I , a like most I tell would greatest 3 whom . sure this a senators in
 the you senators 3 this Honourable , am like tell but , a , August been had away about and for in said to . of sure has who today you I on passed would , friend written greatest I respect I friend much as did house a , most
 and written 3 who has Honourable to house did a passed but for greatest , I you I about . on whom would away been the much sure am respect , friend senators today in a like , of , , friend tell August had most said as this I
At the young age, much too young, of 63, Senator Pietro Rizzuto departed suddenly from this world, leaving a large family and a very large circle of friends utterly bereft.  
 Rizzuto At from of much young 63 of , the family this bereft leaving circle , utterly world , Pietro a Senator large large very friends too , suddenly and a age departed . young
 age departed Senator suddenly world bereft At , a large Pietro from a 63 utterly and . young circle , , of this young of Rizzuto friends large the very family , too much leaving
 , utterly a world departed too Senator bereft large and 63 At family of , very from the much age , large suddenly young young . friends Pietro this , circle Rizzuto of a leaving
 , circle Pietro from leaving of Senator age world a , departed At family much . large 63 friends very suddenly , bereft this of young too young Rizzuto a and , large the utterly
 large of leaving Rizzuto Senator of very . bereft utterly too , much young circle suddenly from 63 world the departed family and a young , friends this , age large Pietro At a ,
 this age , 63 world At suddenly of utterly too , from large , circle departed a large and , the . young very a Senator Pietro leaving Rizzuto bereft friends family much young of
 family friends much from , large too age Senator young very a of , , utterly of Rizzuto , leaving young Pietro departed . 63 this world suddenly bereft and the circle At a large
 , the utterly much this leaving , At young family young large . 63 Pietro very Senator and , age circle suddenly Rizzuto of from a too large departed friends a , bereft world of
 world suddenly the . this utterly very , young of Rizzuto Senator much 63 circle , from a young friends large of leaving Pietro a , family large and departed too At age , bereft
 leaving world suddenly this circle At a a the friends , Rizzuto too and . bereft from age young very large utterly , departed young , much family large Pietro of 63 Senator , of
 too large and At the age suddenly leaving from 63 utterly , bereft world large Senator , circle much young . a this of Pietro friends young family , a Rizzuto very of departed ,
 too young , . bereft this from Rizzuto a Pietro At the , , utterly 63 friends suddenly a large departed Senator world of very age , circle much leaving and large family young of
 departed too the , this of At 63 friends very family large age , world , much circle young , large a leaving Senator suddenly and of a from Pietro bereft Rizzuto young . utterly
 of bereft age , Senator 63 very , large young from large of a young the and Rizzuto suddenly leaving . friends this , departed utterly family too much At circle , Pietro world a
 world friends large bereft much Rizzuto , leaving from large , utterly circle family a suddenly departed 63 , , Senator very young a age . Pietro the of of At and too this young
 much leaving Senator circle family this utterly too very bereft 63 large Pietro age a Rizzuto of from , , world , . young the suddenly young friends At departed , large a and of
Your Committee, to which was referred the Bill C-10, Act to implement a convention between Canada and Sweden, a convention between Canada and the Republic of Kazakhstan, a convention between Canada and the Republic of Iceland and a convention between Canada and the Kingdom of Denmark for the avoidance of double taxation and the prevention of fiscal evasion with respect to taxes on income and to amend the Canada-Netherlands Income Tax Convention Act, 1986 and the Canada-United States Tax Convention Act, 1984, has examined the said Bill in obedience to its Order of Reference dated December 8, 1997, and now reports the same without amendment.  
Respectfully submitted, 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this bill be read the third time?  
On motion of Senator Kirby, bill placed on the Orders of the Day for third reading at the next sitting of the Senate.  
Present State and Future of Agriculture 
Report of Agriculture and Forestry Committee Tabled 
Hon. Leonard J. Gustafson :
Honourable senators, I have the honour to table the second report of the Standing Senate Committee on Agriculture and Forestry, which requests that the committee be empowered to incur special expenses pursuant to the Procedural Guidelines for the Financial Operation of Senate Committees .  
I ask that this report be printed as an appendix to the Journals of the Senate of this day.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is it agreed, honourable senators?  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this report be taken into consideration?  
On motion of Senator Gustafson, report placed on the Orders the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate.  
Present State and Future of Forestry 
Report of Agriculture and Forestry Committee Tabled 
Hon. Leonard J. Gustafson :
 the young age , much too young , of 63 , Senator Pietro Rizzuto departed suddenly from this world , leaving a large family and a very large circle of friends utterly bereft .
 from world 63 departed large Senator family this suddenly much bereft , and utterly , of a friends very leaving young a circle , Rizzuto too At Pietro , large age . of young
 63 utterly departed the bereft leaving large Pietro circle Senator large this . young , much world friends , young from age suddenly At of very Rizzuto a of family , a and too
 Pietro bereft 63 family the large , suddenly from of of world too very , Senator leaving young young circle , a utterly Rizzuto friends departed a At and much large this . ,
A sensitive, generous, courageous, upright and devoted man, Senator Rizzuto leaves behind a major legacy, in particular for Canadians from Quebec. 
 particular a Canadians Quebec upright in sensitive , major and leaves , A , man legacy devoted , Rizzuto , for from Senator courageous . behind generous
 generous , sensitive behind , courageous , for man Canadians leaves A legacy devoted , from a upright , Senator in particular . major Rizzuto Quebec and
 upright generous Rizzuto major leaves , , from , devoted Canadians Quebec . , particular Senator sensitive a courageous behind in man for , and legacy A
 behind devoted man legacy Rizzuto leaves , Quebec . upright A , for generous , courageous particular Senator from a major and , Canadians in , sensitive
 Rizzuto leaves legacy Senator , , courageous in . sensitive , behind Quebec for generous particular Canadians devoted A upright , major , man from and a
 . , in man Rizzuto , sensitive , upright A , particular generous and , devoted leaves Canadians courageous Senator a legacy for major Quebec behind from
 and , a man , Rizzuto , major generous particular , devoted legacy from courageous sensitive upright for . Quebec Senator behind in A Canadians leaves ,
 from , man A particular major sensitive Rizzuto courageous and upright generous devoted , , for legacy , behind Quebec , Senator a Canadians leaves . in
 , , for courageous Senator major leaves Rizzuto , man . a upright Quebec , devoted sensitive A from , and Canadians legacy in generous behind particular
 and man legacy Senator behind , Canadians , a courageous sensitive , , particular in upright Rizzuto . generous , Quebec leaves devoted for A major from
 and Canadians A , in Rizzuto , behind from a upright , major courageous . , sensitive Quebec leaves generous , particular legacy Senator man for devoted
 A major devoted Rizzuto courageous , in leaves upright from behind , Quebec , Canadians . and , sensitive legacy , Senator for particular a man generous
 Canadians Senator , devoted . A and legacy upright , leaves , from man , , a sensitive generous particular in major courageous behind for Quebec Rizzuto
 and devoted , , A from particular behind a Senator for , , , Quebec leaves major . courageous Canadians man Rizzuto legacy in upright sensitive generous
 man , sensitive for behind , Senator legacy in and a , particular . courageous Quebec Rizzuto from leaves , , major Canadians upright generous A devoted
 sensitive , , a devoted for major from , generous , Canadians particular Rizzuto courageous A upright Senator leaves in . behind Quebec legacy man and ,
It must be ensured that a conflict of interest of this kind is not permitted at all. 
I will return to this shortly.  
My fourth point concerns investment policy. 
The law should provide that the administrators of the fund are responsible for ensuring contributors a reasonable pension, while providing them with the best return, that is, the safest and best return possible.  
Canada's economy represents about 2.5 per cent of the world economy. 
So it would be wise to permit the fund not only to diversify its investments in stocks and bonds but also to invest worldwide. 
Diversification of values, in a variety of instruments, in various sectors, in different countries and currencies is thus a measure of wisdom and judgement to be left to those in charge, who must, of course, be accountable for their actions.  
Honourable senators, it would be tempting for the administrators to act as investors on occasion by investing in all sorts of businesses with their judgement either arbitrary or verging on patronage. 
We have seen this in Quebec. 
There must be strict rules to prevent this sort of thing, if we want to avoid regrettable misuse.  
The matter of the pension plan's objectives is basic. 
In this respect, the legislation must be clear. 
The board must first and foremost look after the interests of the contributors whose income security depends on its performance to a large extent.  
The history of the Quebec Caisse de dépôt et placement warrants examination in this regard. 
In the mid-1960s, at the time it was set up, Mr. Lesage, the Premier of Quebec at the time, described it as an instrument of social security. 
He added, at the instigation of some, that it would also be an instrument of economic development, with the result that, little by little, the managers who were not sufficiently dynamic in the eyes of the directors were replaced. 
It was not Mr. Caouette's money, it was real bucks. 
The second director was also an experienced investment fund manager, but the government changed in Quebec, and we ended up with people who were more dynamic and who wanted to direct the economy. 
That is when it was decided that the people running the Caisse were not dynamic enough and had to be replaced. 
That was done. 
 A sensitive , generous , courageous , upright and devoted man , Senator Rizzuto leaves behind a major legacy , in particular for from Quebec .
 and legacy a for , Quebec generous particular A devoted Rizzuto Senator from . Canadians upright , man behind , sensitive , , leaves major in
 behind Senator a sensitive upright major generous Quebec A , Canadians , . , leaves particular in Rizzuto man legacy courageous from , and devoted for
 , . and in major leaves for Rizzuto , Senator generous from , courageous A devoted legacy upright Quebec sensitive a , , man Canadians particular
The story of Senator Rizzuto's life is the stuff legends are made of, because his life is the dream of any immigrant coming to Canada without any money. 
 life , any without ' the Senator . money stuff legends is Rizzuto of The to immigrant any story is life of coming s the because of dream made his are Canada
 the Canada are s . ' , of his of is life immigrant any of legends without is story stuff dream Senator made The Rizzuto to any because money coming life the
 Canada any without money because is life life of of story his is ' immigrant Senator The the any made stuff legends Rizzuto to s coming are . dream , of the
 , Canada coming without is of the money any his life The legends stuff of . ' the is because Rizzuto dream to immigrant are life any made of s Senator story
 is immigrant ' coming story are of the without The to life of stuff is s , the any life money legends . because Canada Senator any his Rizzuto made dream of
 of s Senator dream life The to is immigrant of of without any , are his the is because stuff life made ' coming story legends money . Canada the any Rizzuto
 legends coming any Rizzuto Canada the any immigrant because . stuff made of s to of the , ' dream life are of money his The is without is Senator life story
 , legends any made without stuff coming are Senator money s is of story the . of of the immigrant Canada The life is any to dream life Rizzuto because his '
 stuff any ' without story is The immigrant coming of . to Senator are money Rizzuto the dream life life Canada because legends s of of made is the any , his
 Canada money the Senator of without the any of legends are coming dream , of Rizzuto because is immigrant made s is story ' . to life life The his stuff any
 of Canada ' is stuff without s are the because of story coming any is immigrant of , Senator to his legends the dream made money Rizzuto any . The life life
 dream Senator without the Canada to any made any . coming the is is Rizzuto ' money of s life story The stuff immigrant of of are life because his , legends
 ' is money dream immigrant any stuff of Rizzuto to legends the life of the made because any coming Senator Canada story s his without are of life The , is .
 any stuff Canada coming without The are , Rizzuto s because immigrant of life his money of is the dream life legends the is of any Senator made story ' to .
 legends Canada The of because Rizzuto is Senator immigrant the made , life any any of coming life are to the of stuff story is without . s his ' money dream
 because of are life is is his to s any of immigrant story money , coming Senator life the ' Canada legends made dream . Rizzuto stuff The the of without any
This would create unnecessary costs and complications in the annual registration of students, the assignment of personnel, the distribution of resources and the establishment of voters' lists.  
Some of the witnesses who appeared before the special joint committee seem to think that the debate on education that has been going on for over 30 years in Quebec is not only about freeing the Government of Quebec of the restrictions resulting from paragraphs (1) to (4) of section 93. 
But even if that were the case, in the five extensive public consultations carried out over the past five years, the reform of public education in Quebec was the major issue - and it is the organizational structures guaranteed by section 93 which obviously are impeding this reform. 
This very public debate necessarily raised the question of whether the Constitution should be amended to solve this problem.  
After hearing the witnesses, the committee was satisfied that a majority of Catholic and Protestant parents - the two groups concerned - supported the amendment to section 93.  
One aspect of the issue that was frequently mentioned is the Quebec National Assembly's unanimous support of Bill 109 and the amendment to section 93. 
Such unanimous votes are significant, but they do not mean there is a consensus in the Catholic and Protestant communities, whose privileges are at stake. 
Such unanimity in the Quebec National Assembly proves nevertheless that support for the amendment transcends party lines. 
The PQ government was reluctant to propose that amendment, because it involved using the amending formula provided for in the Constitution Act of 1982, which that government refuses to recognize. 
The government finally yielded to the pressures from Liberal opposition members.  
Some people were concerned that the debate on national unity might detract from the substance of the amendment. 
If the only concern of the special joint committee had been to prove that "federalism works," it would not have insisted on hearing this evidence showing that there was a consensus among Catholic and Protestant parents. 
From the very beginning, the Government of Quebec assured this Parliament that there was an appropriate consensus in favour of the amendment in that province. 
However, the committee insisted on assessing and challenging these statements - so much so that the Quebec ministers responsible for education and for intergovernmental affairs eventually appeared before the committee, along with the official opposition critics on these matters. 
Clearly, what was - and still is - at issue is the legitimacy of the amendment.  
It was mentioned repeatedly that, as a result of the Supreme Court decisions, it has become obvious that the rights that are positively guaranteed under section 93 are not as broad as they were originally assumed to be. 
However, we do not believe that the amendment was justified because the denominational education rights guaranteed under section 93 were nothing more than empty shells. 
Had we been satisfied that the majority of Catholics or Protestants in Quebec were opposed to the amendment, it would not have mattered whether or not their rights carried much weight. 
I think that Senator Lavoie-Roux was quite right in saying that minorities often require special protection to be free to exercise their rights. 
But it is possible to limit or remove this special protection with the consent of a majority of this minority.  
 The story of Senator ' s life is the stuff legends are made of , because his life is the dream of any immigrant coming to Canada without any money .
 any s is made life because without his Rizzuto the are immigrant of stuff legends is dream the . of ' , any life Canada money story Senator to coming of
 of money story ' are life dream of of Canada the stuff Rizzuto . to made Senator the immigrant s any legends is The any is because , coming life his
 without s dream legends story life money made any his is because of to of The Canada . any , of are Senator Rizzuto coming stuff ' life is the the
He liked to share the memories of his first years here.  
 here to of liked memories first years share . He his the
 liked He his share . to the first here years of memories
 years of memories first to here his the share . He liked
 share He memories the first of his here years . to liked
 share memories years liked He . first the of his here to
 here of . share He first liked to the years his memories
 He years liked memories . the first his of to share here
 . share first liked to memories his the He years here of
 . first share He memories to here his the of years liked
 the years share his liked memories to . here of He first
 first . his share the liked here memories to years of He
 He memories first years share of liked here . his the to
 first share to memories liked years of his . here the He
 memories years to of first his share He . here liked the
 liked to He first years . his of memories here the share
 his first here memories share the He years to . liked of
The Citizen said: "Paul Lucier said the Senate's legal staff approved his change in residency five years ago when he moved to Vancouver."  
Senator Lucier says: 
This is not true. 
I never spoke with legal staff five years ago about this. 
I never had any problem about residency.  
2. The Citizen said: "He said Senate staff told him he could keep his seat as long as he continues to own property in the Yukon."  
Senator Lucier replies: 
Again, I never spoke to the staff and was therefore never told any such comment. 
On my attendance, 21 % (19 out of 87 sittings), and on the statement: "He says - 
Senator Lucier has underlined the word "says."  
- he has bone cancer and must live in the British Columbia city for treatments".  
Senator Lucier replies: 
I wonder if Jack Aubry is questioning the fact that I have cancer. 
I would gladly give him permission to question my doctor as to whether I have had cancer for 10 years.  
4. I would like to have these points clarified but not in the media. 
I truly appreciate all the support I have received from my colleagues regarding this subject. 
Thanks to all of you.  
History of the Vote in Canada 
Book Launched by Governor General 
Hon. Mabel M. DeWare :
 He liked to share the memories of his first years here
 his liked of here first . memories the He years share
 first to of years He liked memories here . the share
 He of here first to memories . his years liked the
A son of a Sicilian peasant, he arrived in Montreal in the dead of winter, in 1954. 
 dead Sicilian peasant A 1954 a winter the . of in , in of son Montreal arrived , in he
 Montreal of the A , of dead winter peasant in son in he Sicilian in 1954 arrived , . a
 the Montreal Sicilian winter in in of in , , 1954 arrived a of A dead . peasant son he
 son dead of . , Montreal winter he arrived peasant the Sicilian 1954 in , a of in in A
 in arrived dead 1954 , peasant in A , Sicilian a the of son Montreal . in winter of he
 he peasant dead Montreal son in . in of the Sicilian a 1954 arrived , , in of A winter
 A Montreal , peasant arrived in in in of 1954 . Sicilian a , he winter the dead son of
 winter the 1954 he of A Montreal of . Sicilian in peasant , in arrived in a , dead son
 in of he Sicilian in peasant son , of Montreal a the arrived , in dead winter . 1954 A
 Montreal arrived son the of Sicilian of peasant in he A a in . , winter in , dead 1954
 in , , in . A Montreal the a in he son of dead Sicilian arrived peasant winter of 1954
 he dead in a the Montreal in winter of , arrived A peasant 1954 , Sicilian . son in of
 peasant in in A arrived the . of Sicilian 1954 in son a of Montreal he , winter , dead
 A a winter arrived in peasant 1954 . dead of , Montreal of , Sicilian the in in he son
 in the , 1954 peasant he Montreal arrived a son winter in Sicilian in of . of A , dead
 in peasant the Montreal of . 1954 A winter , he in of dead arrived a Sicilian , son in
Negotiations on Multilateral Agreement on Investment-Continuation of Limit on Foreign Ownership of Commercial Licences-Government Position 
Hon. Gérald J. Comeau :
Honourable senators, my question to the Leader of the Government in the Senate is in regard to the Multilateral Agreement on Investment. 
One of the fundamental objectives of the MAI is to treat non-resident investors as if they were domestic investors; what is called the national treatment principle. 
The government assures us that attempts will be made to protect our culture, but the government has also been very vague on the other important sectors of our economy.  
Would the minister, therefore, advise this house whether our negotiators will seek to continue the 49-per-cent foreign ownership limit on commercial fishing licences in Canada?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, I am not sure what is the present position. 
I presume that my honourable friend is correct in his assumption, but I will have the matter clarified.  
Senator Comeau :
I might advise the minister that indeed there is a 49-per-cent limit on foreign ownership of licences. 
Unfortunately, almost nothing has been said by the negotiators as to how they will handle these extremely important issues that impact on all the coastal communities of Canada.  
As a supplementary, would the minister also advise whether the government negotiators have been consulting with the fishing industry on this subject? 
If so, what has been the government's position in relation to the fishing industry?  
Senator Graham :
The answer, honourable senators, is that they have been consulting with the fishing industry. 
I believe the position of the industry is exactly as suggested by my honourable friend. 
That is something else that I will have clarified for him.  
National Defence 
Search and Rescue Helicopter Replacement Program-Possible Cabinet Discussion on Awarding Contract for Helicopter Purchase-Government Position 
 A of a Sicilian peasant , he arrived in Montreal in the dead of winter , in 1954 .
 dead winter in the , he arrived A in in . , Sicilian of a 1954 of Montreal peasant
 in , he peasant a the 1954 of A , in in winter Montreal Sicilian . son arrived dead
 . 1954 A winter dead the in in , , Sicilian son in arrived peasant of of Montreal a
Pietro's life did not only revolve around business. 
 revolve business not s only life Pietro around . ' did
 life around ' revolve business s Pietro did not . only
 revolve . around life not only did business s Pietro '
 Pietro s around ' revolve did business not life . only
 business ' only life not s did around . revolve Pietro
 ' . not life around only did s Pietro business revolve
 . only Pietro ' s around business did life not revolve
 did revolve Pietro business . life ' not s only around
 around did revolve not ' . life business s only Pietro
 s ' only Pietro did around revolve business . life not
 not ' business . around life did only revolve Pietro s
 life only around did . not s revolve Pietro ' business
 revolve ' around not only s did life business Pietro .
 s business revolve ' did . not around Pietro only life
 revolve only did life not Pietro business s around ' .
 s revolve . only business Pietro did ' life not around
Honourable senators, I think we have fulfilled our constitutional responsibilities if each senator is individually satisfied that a reasonable test of the majority of the minorities has been achieved. 
Under the evidence presented to us - not outside the room, but before us - that was clear. 
In that respect, I support the report and the resolution.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
It was moved by the Honourable Senator Pépin, seconded by the Honourable Senator Lucier, that this report be adopted.  
Is it your pleasure, honourable senators, to adopt the motion?  
Motion agreed to and report adopted, on division.  
Quebec 
Linguistic School Boards-Motion to Amend Section 93 of Constitution-Debate Adjourned 
Hon. Fernand Robichaud , for Senator Graham, rose pursuant to notice of Thursday, October 2, 1997: 
Whereas the Government of Quebec has indicated that it intends to establish French and English linguistic school boards in Quebec; 
and whereas the National Assembly of Quebec has passed a resolution authorizing an amendment to the Constitution of Canada; 
and whereas the National Assembly of Quebec has reaffirmed the established rights of the English-speaking community of Quebec, specifically the right, in accordance with the law of Quebec, of members of that community to have their children receive their instruction in English language educational facilities that are under the management and control of that community and are financed through public funds; 
and whereas section 23 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms guarantees to citizens throughout Canada rights to minority language instruction and minority language educational facilities under the management and control of linguistic minorities and provided out of public funds; 
and whereas section 43 of the Constitution Act, 1982 provides that an amendment to the Constitution of Canada may be made by proclamation issued by the Governor General under the Great Seal of Canada where so authorized by resolutions of the Senate and House of Commons and of the legislative assembly of each province to which the amendment applies; 
now therefore the Senate resolves that an amendment to the Constitution of Canada be authorized to be made by proclamation issued by His Excellency the Governor General under the Great Seal of Canada in accordance with the schedule hereto.  
SCHEDULE 
AMENDMENT TO THE CONSTITUTION OF CANADA 
CONSTITUTION ACT, 1867 
The Constitution Act, 1867, is amended by adding, immediately after section 93, the following: 
 Pietro ' s life did not only revolve around business
 business not around Pietro did life s only revolve '
 around life only . did not Pietro ' revolve business
 did s revolve . around ' not life Pietro only
He liked to be active in social and political organizations. 
 political active in organizations . He be social to liked and
 organizations in He political . liked social to be and active
 organizations political He to social in be and active liked .
 social in active liked . political and organizations He be to
 organizations He and political in active . liked be social to
 He liked and be active in political to . organizations social
 social He and . active liked in to political organizations be
 organizations and social He in to active liked political be .
 political He liked and in social active to . be organizations
 active liked political organizations . social and He in to be
 liked political to and . active in be organizations social He
 organizations He be and social . in active political to liked
 He active in liked social and organizations . to political be
 He be and to liked . political social in organizations active
 and political be liked to organizations in social He active .
 in political liked . He social active organizations be to and
It was not clear that the entirety of these two groups were objecting. 
These are the two groups to which Senator Bolduc referred.  
There were certain spokespersons representing these groups. 
They were French-speaking Protestants and a smaller group of English-speaking Roman Catholics. 
The Catholics were represented by English-speaking priests.  
Again, in Senator Bolduc's thoughtful speech, he refers to these groups. 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, I regret to interrupt once again. 
The clock now says six o'clock.  
Senator Carstairs :
There is agreement that we will not see the clock, Your Honour.  
Senator Grafstein :
It is not clear to me whether these witnesses represented the entire spectrum of the groups for whom they spoke. 
Having said that, their rights are of concern.  
However, it is clear that denominational teaching will continue inside the province of Quebec by Quebec law.  
It is difficult to see how their accessibility to denominational teaching in the public school system will be abrogated in the short run. 
Obviously, it is no small solace, unlike the case for many years in the province of Ontario, that minority denominational rights, religious education, was achieved, in part, through public funding in the province of Quebec. In other words, as Senator Lavoie-Roux pointed out, in the province of Ontario there is and was no public funding of other religious or denominational schools, unlike Ontario. 
I want to make specific reference to this point because I have some personal experience in this regard. 
Access to public funding in Quebec for denominational education remains available in Quebec. 
I find it hard to believe how the Province of Quebec in the future, even if the notwithstanding clauses are removed, would not continue to fund denominational training. 
 He liked to be active in social and political organizations
 be liked He political in and organizations to active social
 active organizations in liked political be . He social and
 active liked He and to . social in political organizations
In 1972, he became the founding chairman of the Quebec Federation of Italian Associations, among others; during his last years, he also served at the Cité de la santé in Laval. 
 Cité the . la ; he of Italian during in the the served among Federation Laval founding he also his , santé Associations years , , others chairman Quebec last In of de 1972 at became
 founding Italian others also the at Quebec the in . became among during ; In he Cité last de the santé of , Associations 1972 Laval , , of chairman served his Federation he la years
 chairman of , ; the the also of in . 1972 among la last became , Laval Associations Italian Quebec Cité , he Federation his the santé others years In during founding de served he at
 , also chairman , among years of Quebec Federation he ; In at , of became Associations de Laval la his 1972 during last . founding in santé served the the others he Cité Italian the
 In the Associations last la became , Quebec also the Cité , . in years Laval he among chairman Italian the served of Federation founding , of 1972 he others his at ; de during santé
 of in served the the also became at among , Cité 1972 santé during his Laval de ; he , of Associations last Italian he founding Federation . the , others la chairman years In Quebec
 he santé during became the of the at in chairman served Italian the Laval . among also de ; 1972 Cité In he years last la Quebec founding , his Associations of Federation others , ,
 the the Federation of founding at also in santé chairman he others became of among his Laval , , 1972 Cité the la de In , during Italian last he Quebec years ; served . Associations
 Federation the others during Italian he , chairman In , became Laval la among founding santé last also Associations ; he . the , 1972 his of in years Cité de Quebec the of served at
 among de . Laval the santé founding , Federation his 1972 Italian also la of , chairman in the became he others Cité , years during served last In Associations of Quebec the at ; he
 served chairman Quebec In years santé Laval of de he 1972 . Associations , in founding at Cité last the Italian ; , the of others , during among Federation also the became he la his
 he , la Laval de others Quebec the Associations Italian at 1972 . of he the the founding Cité in of chairman , last Federation , ; In became santé his among during years also served
 Quebec , his . de of 1972 the he he of others Federation also chairman Cité Italian , founding santé in during became at la the last served ; , In Laval Associations among years the
 the de Cité chairman 1972 Laval , in Italian others he he during the ; of served Quebec la years Federation his founding the became among Associations at In also last , santé , . of
 de founding la of Laval the . he the Quebec he last Federation in others served Italian his of santé , 1972 the at Associations , also became In , among years during Cité chairman ;
 of he became years also last he , the in la ; his de of Quebec the chairman In Italian Associations Cité 1972 the served , Federation during . santé founding others , Laval among at
If he is so competent, what has this big brother been doing for 20 years? 
He agreed to give pension benefits to people, but forgot to levy what he needed to be able to do so, and what he levied, he loaned to the provinces at such low rates that, unless there are drastic changes, the plan will go bankrupt.  
Here we have a classic case of public mismanagement. 
On the one hand, they hand out goodies and, on the other, they forget to charge for them. 
And now they have learned nothing from this sad tale:
Ottawa is asking for even more from everyone and tells us that this time it will invest the money wisely and that it will be for the future good of all.  
Honourable senators, I would much more prefer looking after my own retirement, and I know many Canadians who would like to be free to do what they want with their own money.  
There are many other aspects of this bill that require serious consideration, but I will deal here with only one or two.  
The bill provides for the creation of a government agency responsible for investing the funds collected from contributors to the Canada Pension Plan.  
This agency will have more or less the same powers as the Caisse de dépôt du Québec. 
The management of these funds will therefore be given to a government monopoly, as was done with the generation and distribution of electricity.  
However, how can the performance of a monopoly be assessed? 
And do you know of any monopoly where unacceptable mismanagement did not occur at one time or another? 
There is a long list of unfortunate cases of poor management - we have all heard stories of the extravagant expense accounts of people in the public sector who think they own the jobs they are holding - of bad investments, such as those made in real estate by an agency like the one we are creating, for example, of consumer gouging - we have seen monopolies charge excessive rates, because they were the only ones providing the service - of unreasonable benefits, such as complete job security for employees at the expense of the taxpayer - as has occurred in crown corporations you are familiar with - of differences in economic and social objectives - this also happened when an agency was created and given a mandate, and then after 15 years, it started doing something else, we have all seen this - of conflicts of interest involving officials who make no difference between their personal interest and that of the public, et cetera.  
There is a long list of horror stories involving monopolies. 
The whole history of the public sector, here and elsewhere, is full of such unfortunate incidents. 
I will not speak here about what occurred in Eastern Europe or in the Communist Bloc. 
But in this country and in countries like France and England, such cases have been a constant feature of the past 15 or 20 years.  
You may tell me that such things also happen in the private sector. 
Of course, but in this case it is everybody's money that is at stake, and not just private funds.  
 In 1972 , he became the founding chairman of the Quebec Federation of Italian Associations , among others ; during his last years , he also served at the de la santé in Laval .
 Laval at , among Associations last la , others Federation served he his Italian became he santé of founding the the during the also . chairman 1972 , In of Cité ; de Quebec in
 de last his Laval at he served Federation he years the chairman among , of also santé the Associations , In became 1972 . of Cité Quebec , Italian founding the in la during ;
 the Italian ; at others the , of Laval Federation in Associations he last served founding years chairman . he his In the became Cité , among of Quebec la , also santé during 1972
He was always very active and respected in the community; like a guide, he was constantly being consulted.  
 He guide respected ; the was community in constantly a consulted always being . and was like active very he ,
 he consulted in . like guide being active He respected and was ; always community was the very , constantly a
 active ; the consulted he community He . a respected always was like constantly guide being in very , and was
 like a . guide community he constantly He the was and being , active in very respected consulted was always ;
 , was consulted being community the constantly always was and ; . a like in very respected he guide active He
 being , in always like . active he and was constantly guide He ; respected a the consulted very community was
 and he community a was being respected active always very constantly , like consulted ; He in the . guide was
 like active . consulted He community in the he constantly a being guide , always and was very was respected ;
 guide the he active in constantly He , and very community ; . always being respected a was like was consulted
 , active . was very like constantly He being was and he always guide consulted a respected ; in community the
 ; the was consulted always . being like community , He in guide he and was active constantly a very respected
 active like , very was in he guide constantly being community consulted . and ; was always a the He respected
 the and in , He guide he respected . was like always a ; community constantly was very active being consulted
 community active very respected the . , ; in he like consulted being always a was was and guide constantly He
 was He he and always in active community the ; was being , guide . very consulted a like constantly respected
 , was He like respected was he and guide very being constantly in consulted active . ; always a the community
The government charges taxes for transportation then imposes user fees at airports and tolls on highways for the right to use the airports and highways that we have paid taxes to build and maintain. 
It imposes taxes to create historical sites and national parks and then charge people to get in. 
It charges premiums for pensions but, by the way, cannot pay those pensions, so the government has to charge us more.  
Look through the bill. 
It is simply paying more money for less benefits. 
Anyone can do that. 
Even the Liberals can do that.  
The government is unable to manage the present program so it wants more money to enable it to manage it better. 
We must remember that the author of Bill C-2 is Paul Martin. 
Paul Martin is a real smart guy. 
We remember that he had to stoop to bribing three Atlantic provinces, with other people's money, to fulfil his promises of harmonization. 
He later apologized to the Canadian people for misinforming them.  
Meanwhile, the Prime Minister and Deputy Prime Minister, Sheila Copps, were promising to get rid of the GST, but they did not really mean it, they said, although they were caught out on tape not telling the truth.  
Paul Martin promised in the old Red Book that the government would cancel the helicopter purchase and use the money to pay for more social programs. 
Now, $900 million later, we have no helicopters that fly safely. 
He penned the Red Book to renegotiate the free trade agreement. 
He took all the kudos after the 1993 election.  
Now he says: "Rush Bill C-2. 
Trust me." 
The minister says that he needs the bill now to satisfy an agreement with the provinces. 
 He was always very active and respected the community ; like a guide , he was constantly being consulted .
 he very guide He a consulted active . , ; respected like the being constantly was was always in and
 active being . the community was constantly was consulted he He respected a very , like in guide always and
 in was a guide was always constantly very and the He . he ; consulted respected active , being community
Senator Rizzuto loved politics. 
 politics Rizzuto loved Senator .
 Senator politics loved Rizzuto .
 loved politics . Senator Rizzuto
 politics loved Rizzuto . Senator
 . Senator Rizzuto loved politics
 Senator Rizzuto loved . politics
 politics . Senator Rizzuto loved
 politics . loved Senator Rizzuto
 politics Rizzuto Senator loved .
 politics . Rizzuto loved Senator
 politics . Senator loved Rizzuto
 loved . Rizzuto Senator politics
 politics . Rizzuto Senator loved
 . Senator Rizzuto loved politics
 . loved politics Senator Rizzuto
 . Rizzuto politics loved Senator
This morning, the Quebec minister of intergovernmental affairs, Mr. Brassard, said, and I quote: 
This is what we have always said.  
Bear in mind that this minister is a separatist. 
I repeat what he said: 
This is what we have always said.  
Mr. Chrétien has acknowledged that the federal government would negotiate. 
Could the Leader of the Government in the Senate tell us under what authority the Prime Minister could negotiate?  
Senator Graham :
The Prime Minister would be negotiating on behalf of Canadians, but recognizing at the same time that nine other provinces and the territories are involved. 
I am sure the Prime Minister would take all of that into consideration.  
Senator Nolin :
The Supreme Court received the request from your government to decide on the issue of Quebec's secession. 
We will learn in all likelihood from the Supreme Court that the amending formula would be appropriate if Canadians agreed to allow one province to separate from the others. 
Have the Prime Minister, the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs or officials of your government had formal or informal discussions on this matter with the representatives of the nine other provinces?  
Senator Graham :
Not that I am aware, honourable senators. 
We are aware, of course, of the meetings that took place with the premiers in Calgary. 
We know there is a first ministers' conference later this week in Ottawa, at which this matter may or may not arise. 
However, I am not aware that there have been discussions, either formal or informal, between the Prime Minister and the premiers up to this point in time.  
Immigration 
 Senator Rizzuto politics .
 Rizzuto loved politics .
 Rizzuto loved politics Senator
 politics loved . Senator
The Liberal Party of Canada and the current government owe much to him. 
 Party and Liberal much to him The of the government . owe current Canada
 owe Party the much Liberal government Canada of and to . him The current
 Party much The and government of to Liberal him Canada owe current . the
 Liberal the Party much and The government to . owe Canada of him current
 Canada him Party and the to Liberal government owe much of The current .
 owe him current Party Liberal Canada the and government The to of much .
 Canada current of . The Party much to him and the government Liberal owe
 Canada owe government The to the and him of . current much Party Liberal
 current to him much owe The and of . Canada the Liberal Party government
 and Liberal . Canada owe much of government the Party to current The him
 much Party to current the owe . Canada The Liberal government him of and
 the Party and The government of . much owe to him Canada Liberal current
 current Liberal much and government the owe . Canada him The Party to of
 him to much of Party Canada owe and the government Liberal . current The
 of government . Party and the to much current Liberal The owe him Canada
 . The Liberal Canada much owe and of the government to him current Party
Leave is granted.  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is it your pleasure, honourable senators, to adopt the motion?  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
Motion agreed to.  
The Senate 
Conduct of Business-Notice of Inquiry 
Hon. William M. Kelly :
Honourable senators, I give notice: 
That on Thursday next, December 11, 1997, I will call the attention of the Senate to the way in which the Senate conducts its business.  
QUESTION PERIOD 
Federal-Provincial Relations 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Province of Quebec-Request for Particulars 
Hon. Fernand Roberge :
Honourable senators, my question follows the announcement made yesterday regarding the government's decision to set at $12.5 billion the cash floor for transfer payments made under the Canada health and social transfer (CHST). 
The government would have us believe that this amount represents an increase in health care payments. 
However, the figures indicate otherwise.  
 The Liberal of Canada and the current government owe much to him .
 The Liberal . the Party current government and to much of owe him
 Canada of owe government him current The the Liberal much . and Party
 the current much . to him owe Canada Liberal of Party and government
Giving unsparingly of his time and energy, Senator Rizzuto literally rebuilt the Liberal Party of Canada after 1984.  
 Rizzuto and time the energy after unsparingly rebuilt . Senator Giving Canada his , literally Party 1984 of of Liberal
 after , . his Party Liberal Giving of time unsparingly rebuilt literally of 1984 and Senator Rizzuto energy the Canada
 literally Giving the Rizzuto and Canada Liberal time rebuilt of unsparingly . Party Senator of 1984 , his after energy
 1984 Rizzuto literally his time Party . Senator of Giving and , energy of unsparingly rebuilt after the Liberal Canada
 Senator energy and time literally the Canada Party 1984 , of his unsparingly Liberal Rizzuto . Giving rebuilt of after
 , . and Liberal his of rebuilt Rizzuto Giving Canada energy time 1984 after literally Senator unsparingly the of Party
 Giving . time after unsparingly literally rebuilt energy 1984 his Liberal Senator of and , Canada Party of Rizzuto the
 time his after , Senator 1984 literally . Liberal Rizzuto and Canada of energy rebuilt unsparingly of Party Giving the
 of and his . , Canada the rebuilt unsparingly time literally energy after Giving Rizzuto Senator of Liberal 1984 Party
 the rebuilt Canada and Senator 1984 time , his unsparingly literally Rizzuto energy of Party Giving Liberal after . of
 Party Rizzuto Senator 1984 of unsparingly , and of Canada his energy Giving rebuilt after time the literally . Liberal
 Rizzuto 1984 Canada rebuilt after , the Party Giving Senator . of of Liberal literally unsparingly time energy and his
 and Party after energy Senator literally . time 1984 Canada Rizzuto rebuilt his of of Liberal unsparingly Giving the ,
 . literally of Giving time rebuilt Canada , 1984 energy Rizzuto of and unsparingly the Senator after Liberal his Party
 energy the Rizzuto Canada of . of literally 1984 and Giving Party his , after rebuilt time Liberal Senator unsparingly
 Liberal 1984 of after Giving of time his . and Party the Canada unsparingly energy Rizzuto literally Senator rebuilt ,
In rebuttal to this, many will point to a letter sent to the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs by the Bishop of Baie-Comeau on behalf of the Assembly of Quebec Bishops. 
It is dated September 30, 1997, and appears as Appendix H in the joint committee report. 
In it, Bishop Morissette repeats the assembly's approval for the establishment of linguistic school boards, but he also adds an important caveat which was only given passing mention in the report itself. 
The letter states: 
Our approval for changing the status of school boards has always been accompanied by one condition: that the denominational guarantees established in Bill 107 be maintained.  
The Anglican Bishop of Montreal, in a letter dated November 3, 1997, to the same minister, and included in the report as Appendix I, wrote as follows: 
...we...favour the creation of linguistic school boards and the establishment of a non-denominational educational system which respects the choice of parents to require that their children receive religious and moral education in conformity with their beliefs.  
We cannot afford to ignore these views, particularly as they coincide with those of many, parents in particular, who testified before the committee. 
Linguistic schools are quite acceptable, we heard repeatedly, as long as the present religious component is maintained.  
Franco-Protestants and English Catholics were particularly concerned. 
While numerically they may not be impressive to others, surely they must be to the Parliament of Canada, the guardian of minority rights. 
Surely, the Parliament of Canada cannot subscribe to the notion that the rights of minorities can be altered, much less obliterated, by a decision of a majority when, at best, that majority may have a detached interest in the concerns and preoccupations of the minority.  
Some assurances may be found in a statement made by the Quebec Department of Education in a advertising supplement which appeared in The Gazette of Montreal on November 29. 
It is headed: "Confessional Schools and Services." 
I will read the two pertinent paragraphs. 
This is the official Quebec policy, from the Department of Education, on confessional schools and services under the new linguistic board system. 
It states: 
The change from religion-based to language-based school boards does not mean that all Québec schools will become secular. 
Each institution will have the option of maintaining or reviewing its current status as a Catholic or Protestant school. 
Students will continue to take religion courses or to receive pastoral animation or religious care and guidance services if they so desire.  
 Giving unsparingly of his and energy , Senator Rizzuto literally rebuilt the Liberal Party of Canada after 1984 .
 the Rizzuto . energy Giving literally his rebuilt Senator Liberal of after Party , time unsparingly of Canada and
 rebuilt of of Giving unsparingly Senator , after literally Rizzuto 1984 Party and time energy the Canada . Liberal
 Canada unsparingly the and Rizzuto of rebuilt Party of , his time Giving 1984 energy after Senator . Liberal
He played a key role in the selection of the new leader in 1990 and he worked as chairman of the Liberal Party's campaign committee in Quebec during the 1993 general election.  
 campaign during of committee role election as . ' chairman the Party in the in the Quebec he s a general and Liberal new of He key worked in 1990 1993 played leader selection the
 key chairman Party He leader and the played the of campaign in in as 1990 election general the during s Quebec . selection worked new a of role 1993 Liberal he in the committee '
 role leader played ' the in in chairman the key the election worked of the Party committee s Quebec and 1990 as he new during a Liberal in . of campaign He selection general 1993
 chairman of Party selection the role during 1993 Quebec played key Liberal and He a election . the new the the general ' leader committee s he in in of in 1990 as worked campaign
 the s the he election in and worked Liberal role . 1993 He a general new Quebec 1990 the leader of ' played Party campaign in during of in the key chairman committee selection as
 in committee in election the key role 1993 in chairman selection Quebec of as played worked ' the general s he during the the Party of a new Liberal . leader campaign He 1990 and
 Liberal He of chairman Party leader during played s in selection of general ' in the and 1993 . in election a new worked the committee the as Quebec key 1990 role campaign the he
 during 1993 the ' Liberal leader the Quebec worked general new and key in in role . he s played committee in the election of selection campaign chairman a as the of Party He 1990
 election Liberal committee selection Party general in the s a and of he campaign the 1990 the as key during He in chairman Quebec ' in of the new worked 1993 played role leader .
 the selection He role campaign of Liberal election chairman in ' worked . Party the in leader in 1993 and 1990 Quebec of general as during played he the key s a the committee new
 role Quebec key of worked He of during new he general campaign chairman selection as 1993 in election played 1990 in leader and Party ' . a Liberal the committee the in the the s
 ' a committee and as he of of the the Party He . general role Quebec Liberal s 1993 the in the 1990 new selection chairman in in election leader during worked played campaign key
 committee 1990 selection Liberal the a general the Party ' chairman of played 1993 election in leader of role worked he s He the Quebec the . key and as campaign in during in new
 of key election . role 1990 in He the and played in the in during he chairman s Party a committee Quebec new 1993 the ' selection worked campaign leader Liberal the of general as
 leader during in key 1990 of Party Quebec general ' role chairman as new He of s the campaign committee the and Liberal in the a 1993 worked selection election played . the in he
 . committee 1993 Party in key 1990 the chairman leader new the election as a s during general worked role and of the ' campaign in selection he in Quebec Liberal played He of the
To what extent will ethics and conflict of interest rules be overlooked? 
My experience tells me and I can tell you that it is going to be complicated.  
Hon. Terry Stratton :
Honourable senators, I should like participate in the debate on Bill C-2, the Canada Pension Plan.  
They were informed; and they could understand the information they were being given.  
At the end of every television interview, the finance minister reiterated that, if they did not like the private sector pension plan, they could stick with the public sector pension plan. 
He did this all the way through, for months, until it came time for the people to decide which plan they wanted.  
Within the first six weeks, 25 per cent of the public were in the private pension plan. 
Today, 90 per cent of the public are in the private pension plan, and that plan is doing extremely well. 
Despite the crisis with the Mexican peso, which involves their next door neighbour, their equity market survived, and is, in fact, doing well. 
Investors are getting good returns.  
Two lessons are to be learned from that. 
First, a communication plan on the part of the government can sell a fund that is fundamentally sound; and, second, a private pension plan can work.  
Honourable senators, we will have a private pension plan in this country within 10 years, because those "generation X" kids will demand it from us. 
The "excess generation," as the article calls you and I, will have no say in the matter.  
My fundamental point is that there must be a communications plan.  
This bill is seen by many people across the country as nothing more than another tax grab by the Liberal government, a tax grab in the range of $100 billion. 
Imagine bringing in a bill of such magnitude without giving Canadians the opportunity to have input into such dramatic changes to their retirement system as we know it, changes which will dramatically change the three pillars of our pension system, OAS, GIS, and the Canada Pension Plan.  
As I noted in a question to the Leader of the Government in the Senate on October 30: 
My question pertains not to the proposed changes to the Canada Pension Plan but to the government's efforts to sell those changes to Canadians. 
 He played a key role in the selection of the new leader in 1990 and he worked as chairman of the Liberal ' s campaign committee in Quebec during the 1993 general election .
 ' the key s of He Party election the 1993 Liberal and worked selection as general in in played he the leader new of during 1990 chairman in a campaign Quebec the committee role
 ' of played 1990 campaign and 1993 in He . in Liberal leader the general Party as committee role of he selection the s the Quebec during a chairman key in the election worked
 of s in Party chairman new 1990 selection committee . the leader played of role the in key Quebec in election Liberal as during ' and the 1993 a worked He he the campaign
Senator Rizzuto was proud of his humble origins, and proud as well of his personal and career successes, proud of his country of Canada, proud to be a Quebecer, and terribly proud of his family.  
 , his be was proud proud of origins career of personal proud Canada , family a his his his of as well Quebecer and . , successes and of Senator humble to Rizzuto , proud of terribly proud country and
 to was Quebecer terribly his his proud of , Canada of career of a proud , , Senator proud . , well origins his and be personal proud successes of and Rizzuto and as his family country of proud humble
 , successes be a personal , as of , proud and was of career , humble of Canada origins his his to his family country proud . and Rizzuto his of Senator proud Quebecer and proud terribly well of proud
 country and of career proud Rizzuto origins , of family . proud personal of and his , of of proud his proud and humble proud Quebecer well be to a as successes his , was his Canada terribly , Senator
 Quebecer proud . his of , of of and proud well his proud , a his terribly personal origins as and of Senator , Rizzuto country career of and be successes proud Canada his was humble family proud , to
 as of personal of proud his . , proud , , his of family of successes of , proud a and Senator be origins terribly proud Quebecer and career his and was Canada well his proud humble Rizzuto to country
 as and a Canada be career proud Senator to his of , personal was of his . country of proud proud Rizzuto family of successes his of Quebecer origins well his and humble , and , terribly , proud proud
 family was country be as successes , proud proud proud and his of his of of , Canada humble career a his Rizzuto and Quebecer of well personal , his . , proud Senator proud origins of to and terribly
 and proud country . of family Canada origins was his his Quebecer Rizzuto career Senator his be of his proud to and of a proud proud humble of terribly , personal proud successes , as of well , and ,
 to of terribly was his proud Quebecer Rizzuto origins of humble proud country his Senator be and , family and career , of and of , a successes his Canada well proud of personal , as . proud proud his
 Quebecer be and of country a career his origins was . well , Canada humble his , to his Senator of and proud proud Rizzuto proud successes of of family and proud as his , proud personal terribly , of
 well Quebecer proud his his , of , his of humble Canada was . Senator proud of of and of proud country to terribly , his proud as origins , Rizzuto family a career successes proud and and be personal
 well , was Canada of proud family Senator career Rizzuto , his and proud terribly Quebecer humble proud proud country as of and successes of be his to a . , , of his and personal his proud origins of
 his of . and a personal and to be Rizzuto Quebecer Canada origins , proud and successes his of his proud proud family well was country terribly of as Senator his proud proud , , humble career of of ,
 of his successes career proud country and to his Senator , personal , proud Rizzuto , proud his proud . , his of family of Canada and as terribly of proud a be and was of Quebecer humble origins well
 well his Rizzuto proud be his Senator and , origins was of as of Quebecer personal of and , successes , . terribly humble , proud family career and his a proud country proud of Canada to proud his of
Senator Tkachuk :
I do not think so, although I have a few things to say about Reform here too, which I will get to right away.  
I would like to quote Preston Manning's comments from Tuesday, October 28, in committee. 
These are the other guys in the other place. 
He was speaking of Martin and Pettigrew.  
The alternative we would like the committee to consider rests on four pillars rather than three: the seniors benefit, which is targeted to lower-income people; a smaller, more focused CPP, not a scrapped CPP; 
There is the big change from the last election.  
...an expanded RRSP program; and tax relief to seniors. 
We will argue that our four-pillar plan delivers more retirement income per dollar invested than this three-pillar plan the government is putting forward.  
I think I have explained some of the ideas we got from the government side. 
The liability of $600 billion becomes unfunded if we all quit paying CPP premiums, but the obligations still have to be met. 
That is what Reform was proposing through the election campaign and over the previous four years. 
They have changed. 
Now they want a smaller CPP.  
However, Preston Manning could never explain the first program. 
Now they have a CPP program which they wanted to explain to the minister in committee. 
Well, they could not get it together. 
Preston Manning, who made a promise to do it before committee meetings ended in the other place, failed to do it. 
I can see why.  
They are making false accusations in the House about people. 
 Senator Rizzuto was proud of his origins , and proud as well of his personal and career successes , proud of his country of Canada , proud to be a Quebecer , and terribly proud of his family .
 well terribly humble his origins , proud of , of as family was his proud his successes proud personal of country of proud and Rizzuto , proud Quebecer his and Senator a . Canada to be and , career
 humble proud to , his his successes of a family of Canada Rizzuto origins his as and proud , proud proud and personal terribly of proud , , be Senator of his well of was and Quebecer career .
 proud career of proud a family to of Canada proud country of of his of proud Senator his origins and personal , was . proud and successes his Quebecer his terribly humble , be Rizzuto and well , as
Senator Rizzuto learned French long before he learned English, and conversations at his house were primarily in French, a matter of principle for him since he had chosen to live in French Quebec and his integration into Quebec society was always a source of pride to him.  
 always Quebec house French a primarily him integration at his he and English . Senator a matter and conversations in chosen Quebec he had Rizzuto principle were to French for learned live him since learned , to was into of long French society before his in source pride , of
 chosen his him . always a source French French and in principle were Quebec to house and long in matter before , integration him at for French had English conversations Quebec society pride Rizzuto live he a his he primarily into of since to , of Senator learned was learned
 chosen him had Quebec into were of matter pride and learned source integration Quebec primarily live in in his . a to Senator always since a principle French French society French he English before conversations long he Rizzuto learned , house at him for of was to and , his
 were his Rizzuto him . learned always Quebec house primarily since integration a in a of learned had long principle was in his to and , to , matter pride French before society him chosen French he of French for Quebec live English source into conversations at Senator and he
 conversations English at matter him house of Quebec for integration , always pride into was . source his live he , in to and were and a before learned French he to long French learned a had society of primarily since chosen French Rizzuto his in Quebec him Senator principle
 chosen of he pride . in , house for English Quebec source to primarily in since of and always at him Senator a society his long integration had his French principle learned before Quebec a conversations Rizzuto live were learned him and into French French matter he was , to
 Rizzuto learned before into since French he he integration at Quebec him . in him source , society were chosen pride French live for always of , a was long Senator learned and in French matter a his primarily conversations English his Quebec to to of and had house principle
 always source English to him conversations a and he French live principle society into since learned learned matter house his , at Quebec in Senator long chosen before to he Quebec of , French primarily . were and had for a pride integration his him was French Rizzuto in of
 primarily French source Quebec French since matter into Rizzuto of . was in his a live principle English and long to society him had a always to house conversations French Quebec pride and Senator his of , he learned chosen , were in him at he before for learned integration
 Quebec at for had him integration he learned live he was Senator to learned long chosen Rizzuto and his of source in and matter conversations society principle always to him were . before French his primarily into , French French English house of , since pride Quebec a a in
 society conversations French to . his a for before his him since primarily pride , source and of Senator live chosen French him Quebec were principle learned he of he , in to into in Quebec had learned long a matter at house English always integration and French was Rizzuto
 a his to in in a into Senator and live matter society were primarily always he Quebec him he , at was before of him of English long Quebec and house French since learned to . conversations integration chosen French French for learned pride had source principle , Rizzuto his
 matter principle into he chosen Rizzuto at Quebec source French a French . him society of , since his primarily his learned long , he of and in to before conversations had for learned were a French house always English him and in pride to integration live Senator Quebec was
 a of was a he of learned in source were Rizzuto chosen and into learned French matter society long French before his , since house English for principle French him primarily him , always live Senator his had to Quebec integration he and . at to pride in conversations Quebec
 and . for French English were French conversations learned before him primarily him French he chosen matter Quebec principle of , to pride and he learned since Rizzuto , Senator into had Quebec society live source of at a to was always in house his his a in long integration
 French pride he French Rizzuto source English society in Quebec live integration of him long since at and was French , in his principle he , of learned his into matter him a before house and . had always to were learned Quebec for to chosen a Senator conversations primarily
Hon. John Lynch-Staunton (Leader of the Opposition) :
That worked for a while. 
Now we have forgotten Mondays, but we have continued on with the practice of having early sittings on Wednesdays. 
As a result, Wednesday has become a normal working session, going on until five or six o'clock. 
The whole purpose of starting the session at 1:30 p.m. has been defeated.  
I do not think it is correct, unless there is an urgency, for committees to sit at the same time as the chamber. 
This is not for appearances' sake, but because the work done here can often be as important in the debates as what goes on in committees. 
At various stages of our work - the introduction of bills, second reading, committee referral, then third reading - we are often doing several at the same time. 
Sometimes even two, three or four committees are sitting when we are sitting. 
That is an improper practice.  
If the deputy leader could guarantee to us that, on Wednesdays from now on - and we will strive to be cooperative - we will sit no later than 3:30 p.m., unless there is a proven urgency, then I think Senator Stewart's motion is in order. 
However, we need that assurance first.  
Senator Carstairs :
Let me assure the Leader and Deputy Leader of the Opposition that we will do everything on our part to ensure that sessions end on time. 
We did sit yesterday, which was a Monday. 
I can assure senators we will be sitting next Monday in order to fulfil the business of the chamber before the Christmas break.  
Senator Kinsella :
On that basis, I do not think leave is necessary.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is leave granted?  
 Senator Rizzuto learned French long before he learned English , and conversations at his house were primarily in French , a matter of principle for him since he had chosen to live in French Quebec and his integration into Quebec society was a source of pride to him .
 chosen source principle he a him into of a his he learned conversations French Quebec long since and to always Rizzuto was French were house , and Quebec matter primarily , learned Senator society had of . in English his in to for him before live integration pride French
 in English and his integration Quebec long learned house before always had him . for into since and his principle primarily matter a he Senator French of source pride him chosen was to learned conversations a Quebec he , in to of Rizzuto French at live were society French
 him of in was at Rizzuto society learned his Quebec . to into for in integration had Senator always English , house were chosen his him since learned and matter French source principle primarily conversations and , he he pride live to before of French a long Quebec French
He was also a man of tolerance and rapprochement, the very example of the fundamental human virtues which have always been a source of Canada's strength, and which it needs now more than ever.  
 a needs source the very virtues and strength man of always ' which now , He tolerance more and human was s than have the ever of which been also it example of fundamental Canada . , a rapprochement
 have was fundamental . and source more been a man it , ever needs strength human ' , of of and Canada also tolerance example the the always virtues which a He very which s of rapprochement now than
 human ever which was of of . it fundamental s , also example tolerance rapprochement the needs than have , and of He man a virtues a and been more very now the which Canada strength always ' source
 virtues , a He tolerance which which example it human Canada , ever always have s also source the now was man of than strength . needs the of rapprochement a ' of more and fundamental and been very
 virtues tolerance a s and was ever more of it of . of and have , Canada very human needs source ' also He which , which the rapprochement the strength than a always been example fundamental now man
 of example , virtues of man Canada strength and always . of been ever , more which He than was human source it which have rapprochement the the tolerance needs fundamental a and also s ' now a very
 of virtues ' fundamental tolerance now it example of source have s needs and and more man which Canada a , of always very which also He , . human strength rapprochement been a the was the than ever
 source He of example , the ever very the virtues a , tolerance of more which always of now rapprochement a and was needs human . than fundamental it strength and man been Canada which also ' have s
 of a the than and tolerance He fundamental . it s rapprochement now the man was been very needs source ' have human of which a , always Canada , example which more ever and also strength of virtues
 was s of tolerance human ' , virtues , always now and also it man fundamental than a strength the been more . Canada of very He which the which have of ever source a needs and rapprochement example
 very example strength s which now rapprochement . more have tolerance a fundamental always , it Canada , the which a and of been ' of source was ever also needs and of than the He man virtues human
 the ever , very now , always of source . which Canada He than it needs been the human a s of which tolerance of and ' was man example more a virtues and strength fundamental have also rapprochement
 . it s human He , of man ' always rapprochement very example was which than source of have fundamental been now virtues of the a , and tolerance more ever which a strength the Canada and needs also
 very fundamental also of which , been now rapprochement source and of of man was tolerance s ever the Canada have needs He a a and it more the , virtues than human which ' always example strength .
 ever and also of Canada been than the tolerance rapprochement virtues , human fundamental needs of . example which have it , the always He s source which a ' strength now and a man was of more very
 . virtues s than and ever fundamental which which now strength a always and of a been was source more , human example Canada of it have tolerance man He of ' rapprochement also the the very , needs
I do not want to answer questions on specific cases, because I find it objectionable.  
Hon. Gerry St. Germain :
Honourable senators, the honourable senator who has just spoken brings a wealth of experience to this chamber. 
He was one of the top bureaucrats and one of the top men in the Quebec government at one time. 
He brings that experience to this forum.  
I would prefer to ask this question of the government side, but no one will speak further on it. 
Therefore, I will ask Senator Bolduc.  
This involves a question that I asked Senator Kirby yesterday. 
It is a question of accountability. 
In theory, it is possible that this fund will become larger than the entire budget of the federal government in the years to come. 
Yet we are placing it in the hands of 12 people.  
Does the Honourable Senator Bolduc concur, as Senator Kirby did, that there should be some scrutiny by Senate and House of Commons committees whereby these 12 people who will be sitting on this board will be under a certain amount of scrutiny before they are placed in this lofty, powerful, very responsible position?  
Senator Bolduc :
Honourable senators, that is a very good question. 
There is one thing in the bill that is very acceptable. 
The Auditor General will be able to look at the management of the Investment Board.  
As a result, there will be some accountability in the form of an audit. 
According to Mr. Massé's report, there are 85 to 90 different government organizations. 
This is all very interesting, but none of them will have as much money as the one we are talking about. 
We are talking about an annual amount on the order of 15 per cent to 20 per cent of Canada's gross national product. 
 He was also a man of tolerance and rapprochement , the very example of the fundamental human virtues which have been a source of Canada ' s strength , and which it needs now more than ever .
 have , He a it s needs which human fundamental been and tolerance rapprochement a of of now source always , virtues and the also strength of than example the ever . which ' man very was more
 He tolerance human of of more was which , have , also which very virtues s and source ' of been strength now always than it the a man rapprochement the ever . and needs Canada fundamental a
 source and rapprochement always . which the strength now , a human , of a the fundamental it which also ever have man ' more very than Canada was s needs virtues tolerance He example been of of
Yes, honourable senators, I shall miss him, his judicious advice, his presence in this house. 
 presence his Yes senators judicious , I , , shall advice house . this , in him honourable miss his
 him this in , his senators honourable . advice shall presence judicious I Yes his , miss , , house
 Yes honourable , senators advice house , presence his , this . in miss , judicious shall his I him
 advice judicious house shall presence . senators I honourable , his miss , , Yes this his , him in
 presence , shall his house senators judicious advice miss , I Yes in , this . his him , honourable
 his honourable , senators him shall advice . this I presence in judicious , , house miss Yes , his
 . judicious his , , his this honourable shall , advice miss senators house Yes in presence I him ,
 his house this in presence , his advice miss , him , I Yes , shall senators . honourable judicious
 house this shall presence his honourable Yes miss . senators , , in I judicious advice his , him ,
 I , judicious . in honourable , his advice shall him Yes senators , , presence this house his miss
 his presence judicious him , , honourable advice I this in shall his . , miss senators Yes , house
 his him I in senators presence advice his honourable , this shall . , judicious , , miss house Yes
 judicious Yes I , his senators this shall him his honourable miss house , advice presence . , , in
 . Yes presence shall this miss , in him , judicious honourable house his advice , senators , I his
 Yes advice his , presence senators , this . him judicious miss , honourable in I shall , house his
 presence senators I miss this , his shall his , him advice Yes , judicious in honourable . house ,
The brunt of this bill is being borne by middle- and lower-income workers.  
Merry Christmas Canada. 
Let us give Canadians a Christmas present by defeating this bill. 
Let us kill the bill.  
We are well aware of the Liberal record. 
We resent the fact that this bill will not be given full Senate scrutiny. 
We also know what will happen when things go wrong with this bill, as they will. 
I outlined the government's record on making promises. 
We know its record on responsibility. 
I can just see it. 
When this bill is in shambles, Paul Martin will be 95. 
Jean Chrétien will be 95 or 96 or 102.  
Senator Taylor :
They will still be in power.  
Senator Tkachuk :
He will not take responsibilities. 
The Grits will never take responsibility for their actions, as they did not when they cancelled the Somalia inquiry, and when they made false accusations against a former prime minister. 
I don't know who, but I'm not responsible."  
There was not an iota of evidence to prove that what they were saying was correct. 
They did not take any responsibility after cancelling the EH-101 contract. 
 Yes , honourable senators , I miss him , his judicious advice , his presence in this house .
 this senators , miss , . Yes advice , judicious , house shall his I honourable his presence in
 miss Yes , senators judicious house his him presence , shall in honourable his , I advice , .
 shall his , judicious . in honourable miss Yes advice presence senators , his this him I , house
I consider it a privilege to have benefited from his friendship for nearly 25 years. 
 years 25 have for consider a from I his . friendship it nearly to privilege benefited
 . it his consider I from privilege have a 25 nearly friendship for to years benefited
 to . 25 it for privilege a years I from nearly his friendship benefited consider have
 privilege nearly I for benefited 25 years from have friendship a his it . consider to
 it years . for 25 I to have his privilege a consider from benefited nearly friendship
 privilege a have consider from friendship it for 25 nearly to his . benefited years I
 friendship consider have his privilege to I 25 years benefited from it nearly for a .
 I nearly from a . to consider for his have benefited years privilege friendship 25 it
 consider his privilege nearly years to for I friendship have a benefited 25 from it .
 a I his privilege for nearly years from . friendship consider benefited it have 25 to
 from privilege for I 25 to years a friendship have his consider it . nearly benefited
 a friendship years for consider 25 from it privilege I . his have nearly benefited to
 to a 25 nearly privilege for years his from friendship . it benefited I have consider
 it a I consider have nearly 25 to years benefited for from . friendship his privilege
 a for his . from years friendship to I it consider benefited 25 have privilege nearly
 . years it his I for from have 25 to privilege nearly a friendship consider benefited
There must be strict rules to prevent this sort of thing, if we want to avoid regrettable misuse.  
The matter of the pension plan's objectives is basic. 
In this respect, the legislation must be clear. 
The board must first and foremost look after the interests of the contributors whose income security depends on its performance to a large extent.  
The history of the Quebec Caisse de dépôt et placement warrants examination in this regard. 
In the mid-1960s, at the time it was set up, Mr. Lesage, the Premier of Quebec at the time, described it as an instrument of social security. 
He added, at the instigation of some, that it would also be an instrument of economic development, with the result that, little by little, the managers who were not sufficiently dynamic in the eyes of the directors were replaced. 
It was not Mr. Caouette's money, it was real bucks. 
The second director was also an experienced investment fund manager, but the government changed in Quebec, and we ended up with people who were more dynamic and who wanted to direct the economy. 
That is when it was decided that the people running the Caisse were not dynamic enough and had to be replaced. 
That was done. 
That is how a deputy minister of finance came to be the president of the Caisse de dépôt et placement du Québec at a time when Finance Minister Parizeau was a very influential member of the Lévesque cabinet. 
This led Quebec industry leaders and other stakeholders to raise all sorts of questions about the policy and management of the Caisse under his direction.  
You know the arbitrary risks inherent in choosing the companies in which the board can invest. 
Of course, there are provisions to limit the ratio, but everyone knows that the percentage of shares required today to control a company is relatively small. 
Can you imagine what kind of arm-twisting this will lead to? 
To collectivize an operation is to politicize it. 
That is what we are doing here, notwithstanding the precaution taken to maintain the board members' independence from the government. 
Even if we are told that they will come from outside the government and operate at arm's length from the government, we must be realistic.  
I would now like to address an important aspect of the bill, namely the impact of the plan on the two pillars of income security mentioned by Senator Kirby. 
 I consider it a privilege to have benefited from his friendship for nearly 25 years
 nearly benefited a to it for privilege friendship years I from 25 . consider have
 consider to from it for . I a his friendship have nearly 25 benefited privilege
 for have 25 . his from benefited I it nearly to consider years friendship privilege
We have lost a great Canadian and a good senator. 
 a Canadian have We and lost senator great good . a
 great . good and senator We have Canadian a a lost
 a good Canadian We great have . lost and senator a
 Canadian have a a great We senator lost . good and
 have senator lost a We a and . Canadian great good
 Canadian great a a and good We have senator . lost
 and senator . lost a Canadian We have great a good
 a a great senator good We lost have Canadian and .
 a and a We Canadian senator good have . great lost
 have lost Canadian a and great senator . We good a
 a good a great lost have Canadian . We and senator
 senator good We great Canadian and have . a lost a
 a Canadian good a senator great lost We have . and
 senator lost a Canadian . good great and have a We
 great and senator lost a have good We a Canadian .
 great Canadian We senator a . lost good a have and
I received a response yesterday to my question, and I wish to read it into the record. 
This concerns employment insurance and the reserve. 
It states: 
A reserve is necessary, since it makes it possible to apply more stable premium rates throughout the economic cycle, thus making it possible to avoid increasing them in a recessionary period. 
In addition, the reserve makes it possible to ensure there are sufficient funds to pay benefits when they are most necessary.  
What happened in the last recession was a $2 billion surplus in the Employment Insurance Account turned into a $6 billion deficit in two years, and it was necessary to increase premiums by 30% at what was already a difficult time for job creation. 
Consequently, the government believes that it is wise to establish a reserve in the Employment Insurance Account.  
I am assuming that since you have given me this response, that was indeed the strategy on the part of the government.  
I then went on to say: 
If I may, I will quote from The Financial Post of today, November 26, a 1997. 
An editorial entitled "EI surplus is a deficit-reduction tax" states clearly that the EI will result: 
...in an accumulated surplus suspected to top a scandalous $19 billion by the end of 1998. 
If you need $8 billion to look after a recession, using the last recession as the example, what kind of recession are you planning on?  
That is to say, what kind of recession are they planning on in the future with a reserve of $18 billion?  
Provincial finance ministers met in Ottawa. 
I think last night they had dinner with Finance Minister Paul Martin. 
In an article in The Globe and Mail yesterday, it was stated: 
With Ontario's Ernie Eves and B.C.'s Andrew Petter leading the charge, the provincial ministers have made it clear that they consider Mr. Martin's recent $1.4 billion cut to unemployment insurance premiums insufficient...  
The premiers have insisted that they have some input into Ottawa's budget-making and how it allocates the surplus among new spending, tax cuts and debt repayment.  
In a telephone interview on Friday, Mr. Petter said the NDP government in British Columbia wants Ottawa to offset a dramatic increase in Canada Pension Plan premiums with reductions in UI premiums.  
 We have a great Canadian and a good senator .
 . lost Canadian senator a We and have a good
 a a lost good . Canadian have great We senator
 and good We lost senator Canadian . have great a
I have lost a great friend. 
 I lost . a friend have great
 lost . great I a friend have
 . I lost friend have great a
 great a friend I lost . have
 . have lost I a great friend
 lost friend have I great a .
 . have I great lost friend a
 have great lost . a I friend
 great I a friend have lost .
 I . friend lost a great have
 have a . lost I friend great
 a I great have lost . friend
 friend I a lost have . great
 have lost . a great I friend
 a have . lost friend I great
 have great I friend a . lost
In other words, will the government ensure that they are not nailed with more taxes?  
Senator Oliver continued: 
We were told that the net tax grab from this and other measures that restrict tax assistance for retirement savings, notably yet another freeze in RRSP contributions, would total about $40 million this year and $175 million next year. 
We were not told how much of that came from lowering the age for RRSP conversions.  
When that many Canadians are unaware of what is happening, we have a severe problem.  
On November 20, I said: 
Honourable senators, I wish to address my question to the Leader of the Government in the Senate. 
It dates back to October 1, 1997, to a question asked at that time by Senator Meighen, which is only 51 days ago.  
I will quote Senator Meighen, who said: 
It has been 51 days!  
On November 25, I said the following: 
In a paper released the week prior to November 25, the Association of Canadian Pension Management said that the Seniors Benefit will stifle savings. 
To quote from their paper: 
Middle-income Canadians might simply decide to supplement government programs through the accumulation of non-income producing capital, such as homes or interest-free mortgages for their children. 
They may simply avoid retirement savings plans that generate heavily taxed income...  
They go on to suggest that Ottawa structure the Seniors Benefit in such a way that it will not result in an effective tax rate in excess of 50 per cent.  
Was the government listening when I asked that question? 
Senator Graham said, "Of course, yes." 
Did the Leader of the Government in the Senate read The Financial Post editorial that morning in which it was recommended that this problem be changed to reflect such an issue? 
From what I understand, in the other place all amendments have been struck down and no further amendments are coming forward. 
 I have lost a great .
 a great . have friend I
 . friend great a have lost
 have lost a . friend great
I send condolences as a friend to Pina, Melina, Cristina, his adoring grandchildren, his brothers and sisters.  
 Melina Pina his , grandchildren brothers his condolences as . and to adoring friend a I sisters send , , Cristina ,
 , to Pina , his , grandchildren send friend , I . his sisters a condolences Melina brothers and Cristina adoring as
 , send condolences his and Cristina . grandchildren , his Pina adoring sisters friend as brothers to , , a Melina I
 , send his a Cristina brothers condolences . and his friend adoring I grandchildren , as to Melina sisters , Pina ,
 his his , Cristina and , , condolences brothers to , friend adoring Melina grandchildren . a as Pina send I sisters
 as , his send his and , Melina a sisters , to Cristina condolences brothers grandchildren I adoring friend , Pina .
 friend brothers , condolences grandchildren Melina a , . sisters his Cristina , and to Pina , send I his adoring as
 as condolences Pina his his Cristina , Melina and , a send brothers to . , grandchildren sisters friend I , adoring
 , sisters adoring grandchildren send his a Pina to . as Melina his , Cristina , I , friend and condolences brothers
 , , as , I sisters a Cristina and condolences grandchildren to Melina his Pina friend , send . his brothers adoring
 and Cristina a , grandchildren Melina adoring I . as friend Pina , his sisters , brothers to , his condolences send
 adoring his Pina I brothers a as friend and , to , sisters . , grandchildren Melina his , Cristina condolences send
 brothers Cristina his adoring Pina friend condolences . Melina , , as , his sisters grandchildren I to a and , send
 his as , , friend Pina . , grandchildren Cristina condolences and adoring , brothers to sisters send Melina I a his
 brothers Melina sisters , and a as . Pina his condolences Cristina I send , adoring , friend his to , grandchildren
 to sisters , grandchildren . Pina and Cristina adoring condolences , as send friend , his his Melina a , brothers I
As to precisely where they are, on whatever ocean, I cannot positively say. 
It might be a military secret, as a matter of fact.  
Federal-Provincial Relations 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Atlantic Provinces Equal to Increase in Social Transfers-Government Position 
Hon. Brenda M. Robertson :
Honourable senators, I have a supplementary that goes back to questions raised by the Honourable Senator DeWare. 
I will come back to this again tomorrow and the next day.  
I should like to know from the Leader of the Government in the Senate whether the cuts we discussed yesterday in the social transfer payments for Atlantic Canada represent the increases in the social transfers that were announced twice previously by this government? 
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
No, not that I am aware, but it is an interesting question. 
I will bring forth an answer.  
Delayed Answers to Oral Questions 
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, I have a response to a question raised in the Senate on November 25, 1997, by the Honourable Senator Oliver regarding changes to the Canada Pension Plan and the Investment Board; a response to a question raised in the Senate on November 19, 1997, by the Honourable Senator Oliver regarding the Investment Board not being subject to Access to Information; a response to a question raised in the Senate on October 23, 1997, by the Honourable Senator Kinsella regarding commemoration of the 50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights; a response to a question raised in the Senate on November 20, 1997, by the Honourable Senator Forrestall regarding the lack of helicopters for a number of navy frigates; and a response to a question raised in the Senate on November 20, 1997, by the Honourable Senator Spivak regarding the demolition of government laboratories and the possibility of a restoration of funding.  
Human Resources Development 
Changes to Canada Pension Plan-Accountability and Transparency of Investment Board-Undertaking to Publish Quarterly Financial Statements-Government Position 
(Response to question raised by Hon. Donald H. Oliver on November 25, 1997) 
Bill C-2 requires that the Board prepare unaudited quarterly statements and provide them to the federal and provincial Ministers of Finance. 
The Board may choose to make those statements directly available to the public but the legislation does not require this.  
During the consultations on the draft CPP legislation, including House of Commons Finance Committee hearings, several pension fund experts recommended against publishing quarterly statements. 
 I send condolences as a friend to Pina , Melina , Cristina , his adoring grandchildren , his brothers sisters .
 , Pina . his to a sisters send friend Cristina grandchildren and his as brothers condolences , , Melina adoring ,
 friend condolences , , and sisters to Melina Pina . a brothers grandchildren his , , adoring his as Cristina send
 grandchildren and as I to , condolences , Melina sisters a brothers , send his Cristina friend Pina , adoring his
Hon. Lucie Pépin :
 Lucie . Hon : Pépin
 . Pépin : Hon Lucie
 Pépin Hon Lucie : .
 : Lucie . Pépin Hon
 . : Pépin Hon Lucie
 : Pépin . Hon Lucie
 Hon : . Lucie Pépin
 Hon . Pépin : Lucie
 : . Lucie Hon Pépin
 Hon : Lucie . Pépin
 Hon : Pépin . Lucie
 Lucie Hon Pépin . :
 : Pépin Hon Lucie .
 Hon : Lucie . Pépin
 Hon . Pépin Lucie :
 : . Lucie Hon Pépin
It is not a question of means justifying the end. 
In this bill, the means and the end are equally wrong.  
Time allocation has been imposed seven times on other bills, most recently on third reading of Bill C-22, the Pearson airport bill. 
It was imposed on Bill C-110 which proposed certain constitutional amendments; on Bill C-12 which dealt with employment insurance; and on the committee report on Term 17. 
It is becoming a habit; a habit that is hard to break.  
Bill C-2 is just another in a series of bad bills, incompetent work and dictatorial action. 
It was introduced last week in the Senate, preceded by time allocation in the other place. 
With passage of this bill, the government will be imposing the largest tax grab in the history of the country. 
Canadians are unaware of what is happening, in particular our young people who will be the most affected and the most mistreated. 
We owe it to them, our grandchildren and our children, to study this legislation thoroughly and to amend it, because it is not their fault that this program has been so badly managed. 
They will have little chance of collecting under the CPP, hence the changes the government intends to make.  
We are simply shovelling our hard-earned money into the greedy hands of Paul Martin, Minister of Finance, who wants to be the man who slays the deficit dragon, and we know how he intends to do it. 
He has followed three policy themes to accomplish that end.  
First, he has transferred much of the tax burden to the provinces, forcing what I call "downloaded increased taxes." 
Provincial and municipal governments, who were receiving less money, had to increase taxes. 
The government transferred debt.  
Second, this government has taken advantage of the low interest rates which resulted from the efforts of the Conservative government over eight years to bring the deficit and inflation under control and to bring interest rates down.  
Third, Paul Martin then not only raised licence fees and taxes, he used the accumulated surplus in the EI fund to pay down the deficit. 
It is this third policy theme with which we, on this side, feel most uncomfortable. 
He used the surplus in the EI fund, not to extend benefits, not to reduce premiums - which is normally what is done in a payroll deduction - but to cut benefits for a totally separate policy objective. 
 Hon . Lucie :
 Pépin : . Lucie
 : . Pépin Hon
 Lucie Pépin Hon :
Honourable senators, I would like to add to the testimonials by my Senate colleagues the words spoken by the Honourable Marc Lalonde on the day of Senator Rizzuto's funeral, and I quote: 
 day Honourable the like testimonials Senator by I on I the ' Marc of the , by colleagues s senators funeral Lalonde would to and Rizzuto my add : to Honourable , the Senate words spoken quote
 day Marc the the Honourable quote of colleagues Senator add spoken I the , on words I Lalonde funeral Rizzuto s to and by Honourable ' senators testimonials would Senate , like : to by the my
 , Senator testimonials by the I the the : of funeral senators like Marc colleagues Honourable I by on , spoken and Senate Rizzuto s quote the to Lalonde my add to would Honourable ' day words
 Honourable by spoken to funeral , of words Rizzuto by day quote s senators to on and Senate would : add like testimonials , Senator the ' colleagues Lalonde I the my the Marc I Honourable the
 testimonials Lalonde ' spoken colleagues would the my the funeral words senators to Marc of Senator the Honourable Rizzuto like quote : and day I the by to by on s add Honourable , , I Senate
 I and to the quote on by would spoken add to by funeral Honourable Senate Honourable day the Senator the testimonials senators of the Marc Rizzuto colleagues Lalonde my like , ' : , s words I
 funeral Marc to on the , testimonials , spoken of and the like colleagues Senator Rizzuto I the senators : add Senate by the Honourable quote to words I s Lalonde by ' Honourable would day my
 Senator the Lalonde my I day quote : Rizzuto funeral the colleagues would senators by to , the Senate the on by and , add ' I Marc Honourable testimonials like of s Honourable words to spoken
 like Honourable : , funeral quote I would Marc ' I Senate Honourable spoken day senators the by to testimonials and my by s Lalonde on add of Senator the the words colleagues to Rizzuto , the
 the words would Honourable my of s quote I by Senate to colleagues , and I , Marc Rizzuto spoken ' testimonials funeral Senator the senators Honourable the : day by the like Lalonde to on add
 to my senators on Honourable of : Rizzuto funeral quote like Honourable would day colleagues the Lalonde s the and testimonials spoken by Senate I Marc , add Senator by , the the to ' words I
 the s by Senator to my the Senate like would , to Honourable spoken quote by ' and senators funeral : colleagues add words day I Lalonde , I of Rizzuto the Honourable on the testimonials Marc
 like , Honourable to the I on : would Lalonde add spoken the testimonials Senate day Honourable by Marc colleagues , to quote by senators ' I of my and words s Rizzuto the the funeral Senator
 testimonials Honourable add : I would colleagues by by on the of Lalonde funeral Senate words s and ' spoken Marc senators , Honourable to the like to Rizzuto my I the quote day , the Senator
 quote the Senate to would : , I Honourable the day by by my spoken and s testimonials Marc senators like add of the colleagues to , I on ' Rizzuto Lalonde funeral the words Honourable Senator
 the would ' on add day and by the Senator words I funeral like Senate the Honourable , to Rizzuto I spoken senators , s testimonials Lalonde the colleagues Marc quote my by Honourable to of :
The two ministers who appeared before the joint committee would not reveal their party's position, preferring to await a broad consultation before stating it. 
An uninformed guess, however, leads me to believe that, if the Parti Québécois still forms the government two years hence, the notwithstanding clause will not be renewed, thereby leading to the gradual removal of Catholic and Protestant teaching in public schools as we know it today.  
In rebuttal to this, many will point to a letter sent to the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs by the Bishop of Baie-Comeau on behalf of the Assembly of Quebec Bishops. 
It is dated September 30, 1997, and appears as Appendix H in the joint committee report. 
In it, Bishop Morissette repeats the assembly's approval for the establishment of linguistic school boards, but he also adds an important caveat which was only given passing mention in the report itself. 
The letter states: 
Our approval for changing the status of school boards has always been accompanied by one condition: that the denominational guarantees established in Bill 107 be maintained.  
The Anglican Bishop of Montreal, in a letter dated November 3, 1997, to the same minister, and included in the report as Appendix I, wrote as follows: 
...we...favour the creation of linguistic school boards and the establishment of a non-denominational educational system which respects the choice of parents to require that their children receive religious and moral education in conformity with their beliefs.  
We cannot afford to ignore these views, particularly as they coincide with those of many, parents in particular, who testified before the committee. 
Linguistic schools are quite acceptable, we heard repeatedly, as long as the present religious component is maintained.  
Franco-Protestants and English Catholics were particularly concerned. 
While numerically they may not be impressive to others, surely they must be to the Parliament of Canada, the guardian of minority rights. 
Surely, the Parliament of Canada cannot subscribe to the notion that the rights of minorities can be altered, much less obliterated, by a decision of a majority when, at best, that majority may have a detached interest in the concerns and preoccupations of the minority.  
Some assurances may be found in a statement made by the Quebec Department of Education in a advertising supplement which appeared in The Gazette of Montreal on November 29. 
It is headed: "Confessional Schools and Services." 
I will read the two pertinent paragraphs. 
This is the official Quebec policy, from the Department of Education, on confessional schools and services under the new linguistic board system. 
It states: 
The change from religion-based to language-based school boards does not mean that all Québec schools will become secular. 
 Honourable senators , I would like to add to the testimonials by my Senate colleagues the words spoken by the Honourable Marc Lalonde on the day of Senator Rizzuto ' s funeral and I quote :
 add , by testimonials day Honourable Senator Honourable Rizzuto of Lalonde s on Marc the senators the the ' to and spoken the like to words my I Senate by colleagues would funeral I , :
 and Honourable I add by the I testimonials Honourable funeral Marc the by colleagues words Senator senators : s like , Lalonde the the my Rizzuto spoken ' of to on day to quote Senate ,
 I like Senator Marc , and to , would on Honourable by Honourable the colleagues funeral Rizzuto ' the add I by of my words quote the Lalonde Senate spoken s to : day testimonials senators
On behalf of all the friends of Senator Pietro Rizzuto, on behalf of the thousands who filed past his coffin, on behalf of all those in Canada, in Mexico, and in Italy, his native Sicily in particular, all those who knew him and were prevented by distance from coming to express their 
 the friends coffin of behalf of native prevented thousands all Mexico in the from coming by , Canada Italy knew those filed behalf him Pietro , past distance to in particular , Senator in , and Rizzuto express of his behalf in who their all on were , Sicily those his all , who On and of on
 , of Senator , in those , thousands Rizzuto friends behalf Italy the their native on were , coming of , who Canada distance of particular past Sicily by in prevented and him knew of his coffin all his to from who all on behalf behalf express Mexico Pietro and in filed in all the those On ,
 behalf in behalf his , and coming native to Rizzuto Sicily coffin who On , of Senator in express behalf distance of of Canada in filed past Pietro , thousands all were from him their all the , those , , on all his of Italy those friends Mexico who on prevented by and particular in the knew
 Rizzuto coming his , all Sicily their knew behalf of of express who those in On to of the in the Canada on coffin distance past his , all , him friends those in who by native , all thousands Mexico and , from filed behalf Senator prevented Italy particular in behalf on , Pietro of and were
 were Canada of coffin in all knew their who , distance , Sicily by friends all the his , of from behalf his coming those Italy the behalf Senator who those , in past in and on prevented Mexico thousands him behalf Pietro to express all filed Rizzuto On native , of of , and in on particular
 all by of Italy of past Rizzuto in the behalf , from , on , of who coming in coffin , native friends Pietro Sicily filed who his those behalf , on Senator thousands On their were Mexico knew the Canada those particular in distance and all all in prevented and to behalf , express of him his
 prevented on of who behalf in coffin distance him Rizzuto the on Senator coming express of the Italy were of of by all past their behalf , his , those Sicily friends and filed in in native thousands Pietro all particular those all , , who behalf to in , and On Canada from his Mexico knew ,
 who all coming friends native behalf all Mexico his their his knew behalf in coffin and particular and Sicily the , , distance by to On of from prevented all Canada , him on Rizzuto of Pietro , of in in thousands express , Italy filed Senator the those in who those past behalf of were , on
 friends behalf were thousands in Canada , filed on of Sicily and the all , of distance all particular his native and him of coming who coffin , by from prevented behalf past , all , the those in On on , in knew to Rizzuto express behalf Pietro his Mexico who Italy those Senator in their of
 in Sicily coffin Rizzuto past on , by , those who express the , all from behalf his to , On all their filed Senator of behalf Mexico who behalf , thousands Canada were distance and Italy prevented friends on all knew of those of the in coming Pietro native particular in and of him in his ,
 Senator those of Rizzuto friends their the express on behalf distance particular prevented knew Mexico were who , all of on coming thousands in all by past , native coffin Canada and to Pietro of from behalf , the who , in Italy those On and of behalf his his him , Sicily in , in filed all
 by behalf all past thousands his Rizzuto Pietro those filed who the those , in his friends to express from knew all on behalf , Sicily distance and of were Italy native on and of On of prevented in who the Mexico coming , Canada their , in , of coffin , him Senator particular behalf all in
 knew all prevented , the and all Sicily the coming in all who on particular to in Canada distance of behalf Rizzuto thousands Senator on Pietro those in those behalf friends their in behalf , and of , , , Italy from , past native who express coffin Mexico were him of of by filed his his On
 on their those , distance , particular knew him coming the behalf , and were native Italy all all express Rizzuto prevented of from Pietro those his in in , behalf in the who all coffin to by Senator past of On friends Sicily of of , on filed , behalf Canada who and in his thousands Mexico
 prevented in of distance of all and on express who Italy behalf in all in past Mexico from behalf filed , him behalf his all by , Rizzuto and , knew of coming coffin were friends Canada , in the their who to Sicily Pietro on thousands On those , particular those , native of Senator his the
 behalf all Sicily of Mexico coming all friends of , native in were of him Senator on , from the and knew who their the On , coffin Canada Italy of to all those those , Pietro behalf on in prevented , his who past Rizzuto in distance thousands his in express filed by and behalf particular ,
Sixth Report of Committee Adopted 
Bill to Amend-First Reading 
Canada Marine Bill 
First Reading 
Aboriginal Peoples 
Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples-Committee Authorized to Study Recommendations 
THE SENATE 
Tuesday, December 9, 1997 
The Senate met at 2:00 p.m., the Speaker in the Chair.  
Prayers.  
Pages Exchange Program with House of Commons 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, before I call for Senators' Statements, I should like to introduce the two pages who are with us this week through the exchange program with the House of Commons.  
They are Anne McCulluch of Calgary, Alberta, who is pursuing studies in journalism at Carleton University.  
Kirk Nangreaves of Saint-Hubert, Quebec, is studying at the University of Ottawa Arts Faculty.  
He is majoring in psychology.  
On behalf of all senators and the Senate, I bid you welcome.  
SENATORS' STATEMENTS 
The Senate 
Response to Newspaper Article on Senator's Residency Qualifications 
 On behalf of all the friends of Senator Pietro Rizzuto , on behalf of the thousands who filed past his coffin , on behalf of all those in Canada , in Mexico , and in Italy , his native Sicily in particular , all those who knew him and were prevented by distance from coming to their
 in particular in by behalf , of were Sicily of distance the , friends Pietro his past Italy behalf those , express to their native On , of from all Mexico on him Canada prevented , coming and the , Rizzuto of who all who those and filed on coffin his in Senator knew all in behalf
 Canada all coffin all behalf , , thousands who his the were those coming , Pietro of filed his On express behalf prevented Italy Mexico native knew of those the particular who , from behalf and all Sicily in to Senator on past friends of and , him of by distance in in Rizzuto their in on
 his behalf of the knew express all in thousands , prevented behalf native past , in behalf who of Sicily the their in him , , On on his coming of coffin , distance by those Senator Mexico all on friends to particular those of were who all and in Pietro , Rizzuto filed from Italy Canada
Over the years, we got to know the attributes of this exceptional man, his total intellectual, moral and professional integrity. 
 professional . , , the intellectual total this to integrity , Over of the know attributes man his we moral years got exceptional and
 this to attributes we , man , his professional know integrity . moral , the total exceptional the intellectual years Over and got of
 of the exceptional Over his and to total attributes got the , know man moral years this . integrity , professional , intellectual we
 exceptional attributes , know got the , integrity professional total years intellectual , the . Over moral his to this we man and of
 total his Over know the . moral this to exceptional we years and , attributes man , of professional got , the intellectual integrity
 of , years integrity this attributes we professional to the his know , . and moral intellectual got , the exceptional Over man total
 . intellectual years this exceptional know , integrity Over total the his we moral , to got , man professional and attributes the of
 . moral exceptional got the this total and , the Over attributes intellectual professional we of years man , to integrity his , know
 know the exceptional attributes integrity the intellectual man and got , , , his to this we of total professional Over moral years .
 . this of we Over attributes , professional know moral man integrity his and intellectual , the , years total to got exceptional the
 this and to know professional , the moral of the Over total . got years attributes , , integrity his exceptional we man intellectual
 years got the this attributes , the . we exceptional , his total of integrity intellectual moral Over man , and know professional to
 man to we his intellectual , the years total exceptional professional attributes . , know moral of the , got Over and this integrity
 his total . , , attributes man this professional , Over moral we years the to of integrity know the got exceptional and intellectual
 this , to the Over moral and intellectual the professional . integrity know we attributes exceptional of got man his total years , ,
 professional years the of know we intellectual to , , , total . integrity the attributes man and exceptional his moral got this Over
The 25 or 30 per cent amounting to $22 billion a year goes to old age pensions. 
Every year, we save $80 billion, or 10 per cent of the gross national product, which goes to income security, including $22 billion from old age pensions, $23 billion from the Canada pension fund and $30 billion or $35 billion from private pension plans. 
Savings coming from private pension plans should remain stable in the future or else get smaller depending on the decisions we make. 
Contributions will increase by 70 per cent within five to seven years. 
I think the amounts will remain stable, but they could also drop, if this increase is not compensated by an equivalent decrease in income tax, for instance.  
As for RRSPs, they are likely to diminish if employment insurance contributions and taxes are not lowered.  
In my opinion, we will likely see a reduction in private savings, along with an increase in public savings. 
Is it a good thing to increase the role of the state? 
This is what is being done here. 
It implies that if it is in the public domain, the money will be better invested than if individuals invest their savings in the private sector. 
Who can possibly think that it makes sense?  
What happened in the past? 
Can it be said that the government was more cautious than individuals in the management of its funds? 
I am not blaming one government in particular, but the public sector's attitude is often like that. 
I simply note that this is the way things have been done for 40 years.  
Did the government display more shrewdness in the management of business investments? 
Look at the performance of crown corporations. 
Air Canada, CN and Canadair all did well after being privatized. 
In other words, good management started once the government was no longer involved.  
So, we should be cautious before giving the public sector increased responsibilities for the management of funds. 
 Over the years , we got to the attributes of this exceptional man , his total intellectual , moral and professional integrity .
 intellectual know of this attributes total the we Over years and to exceptional , professional the moral , his . man integrity ,
 exceptional , the intellectual and of years . to attributes we total , got moral the professional integrity , Over know man this
 professional exceptional know attributes integrity the , . , total and his man of to intellectual this Over got , we years the
With Pietro, we always knew where we stood, and his word always sufficed.  
 and stood where knew always we With , sufficed his we , Pietro . always word
 always sufficed stood we , With Pietro where his , we . knew always word and
 , we we stood . , always and Pietro knew sufficed always word his where With
 knew With . stood Pietro sufficed we always , , word his we always and where
 , word Pietro always , we and stood sufficed we his knew With where always .
 his With sufficed and , where stood , always always word . Pietro knew we we
 where always knew Pietro stood sufficed With always his . , , we we word and
 , his and knew we Pietro With . stood always word always we where sufficed ,
 knew stood we where Pietro we With and always sufficed , , . always his word
 his we knew always sufficed we Pietro , and , stood where word always . With
 word his stood knew sufficed always , always Pietro and With we where , . we
 always we his . knew stood and where we word With sufficed Pietro always , ,
 and we always Pietro where word his stood knew we . sufficed always , With ,
 sufficed With always , . word and knew where we always stood Pietro his we ,
 With his knew . and , , stood sufficed we where we word always Pietro always
 we where . always , stood knew and we Pietro word , always his With sufficed
On my attendance, 21 % (19 out of 87 sittings), and on the statement: "He says - 
Senator Lucier has underlined the word "says."  
- he has bone cancer and must live in the British Columbia city for treatments".  
Senator Lucier replies: 
I wonder if Jack Aubry is questioning the fact that I have cancer. 
I would gladly give him permission to question my doctor as to whether I have had cancer for 10 years.  
4. I would like to have these points clarified but not in the media. 
I truly appreciate all the support I have received from my colleagues regarding this subject. 
Thanks to all of you.  
History of the Vote in Canada 
Book Launched by Governor General 
Hon. Mabel M. DeWare :
Honourable senators, yesterday, the Right Honourable Romeo LeBlanc, Governor General of Canada, launched an important new book, A History of the Vote in Canada , which recounts how the right to vote has evolved over the past 250 years. 
The book starts at the time of the first elected legislatures in what is now Canada and ends with the most recent federal election. 
It traces changes in voting eligibility, electioneering and voting practices, as well as voter turnout since Confederation. 
Extension of the vote to those who were excluded legally from the franchise, such as women, aboriginal people, religious and racial minorities, is examined in the social context of the period.  
Even though most Canadian adults were eligible to vote by 1920, there is a final chapter that looks at ways to make voting accessible to everyone, including people in all geographic locations and people with physical disabilities.  
A History of the Vote in Canada is meant to be an educational resource and a reminder to Canadians of the significance of the right to vote. 
This is in keeping with Elections Canada's 1993 mandate to educate voters about the democratic right to vote.  
While this book will appeal to historians, political scientists, university and high school teachers and students, it is hoped that it will also reach those who may have difficulty exercising their right to vote.  
 With , we always knew where we stood , and his word always sufficed .
 . , and sufficed his , stood we always where always With word we knew
 always , . where we always knew word we With stood his and , Pietro
 , always knew word always we we Pietro . With , his and sufficed where
We discovered his generosity, with his possessions of course. 
 generosity with possessions We his course . of his , discovered
 his with discovered , course . possessions We of generosity his
 with , his discovered course possessions of . his generosity We
 his discovered his We generosity . with of possessions , course
 , discovered . course We possessions generosity with his his of
 with generosity possessions of his course . discovered his We ,
 possessions of with generosity . his his We course discovered ,
 possessions , discovered of his . We course with his generosity
 of . with discovered his , generosity course possessions his We
 his of discovered generosity with , possessions . course his We
 course his with of generosity his possessions . , We discovered
 We with discovered possessions course , generosity his his . of
 We . his his course discovered generosity with of possessions ,
 We of discovered . course , his possessions with generosity his
 his his of possessions with course , generosity . discovered We
 generosity with possessions course his . , of discovered his We
Senator Gigantès :
That is because over nine years you did nothing to address the deficit.  
Senator Tkachuk :
That is not true.  
The only reason the federal government is dealing with the situation now is that the minister of finance at the time, Michael Wilson, obtained an agreement that created a certain situation. 
There is a word in law for something from which one cannot extricate oneself, and where a decision must be made. 
That is why they have an agreement today. 
We tried to get it done in 1986.  
Senator Gigantès :
And you failed. 
You could not do it.  
Senator Tkachuk :
Because the Liberals would not agree. 
I will defend my government, and my honourable friend will defend his.  
I will not delve too far into the OAS because there are other speakers who wish to deal with this issue over the next two weeks. 
Perhaps we, as senators, will be able to discuss this matter well into the new year, which I hope we do.  
Senator Gigantès :
You are reading from the wrong script.  
Senator Taylor :
It is obvious that my honourable friend does not have any notes.  
 We discovered generosity , with his possessions of course .
 We possessions , with his . generosity his discovered course
 course . of generosity discovered possessions We , his with
 We generosity his possessions . discovered with of his course
Who could forget the lavish receptions on the occasion of the marriage of his children or the substantial and hospitable spread he put on to celebrate Saint-Jean-Baptiste. 
 . lavish receptions the children the - the Jean marriage and Saint celebrate of substantial spread on to could Baptiste - hospitable his put on he the occasion or of Who forget
 on - or hospitable . and Who could Jean the his marriage occasion the Baptiste of he receptions to forget substantial celebrate the spread on of - children Saint lavish put the
 occasion Jean on forget children marriage celebrate the substantial Saint spread of to and the hospitable on - . - put he could of Baptiste Who receptions the or his lavish the
 - of occasion lavish hospitable - on or . to spread the the substantial his Baptiste of the could Jean the children receptions celebrate forget and put on Who Saint he marriage
 substantial of the could the on - to and the . Saint hospitable marriage he - Baptiste or lavish Who spread occasion receptions Jean children celebrate put the forget on his of
 his occasion Who on on hospitable children - the to of . - marriage substantial of and could Baptiste lavish receptions put Saint spread celebrate the the or Jean forget the he
 . of marriage hospitable Who the Baptiste on put Jean children celebrate his receptions or spread the and the on - forget of the could he Saint occasion - lavish substantial to
 . the occasion - Baptiste hospitable put celebrate of spread he or forget the Saint on the could to children and substantial - of his Who receptions lavish marriage the Jean on
 the spread the his celebrate - to marriage could the put of Jean Saint . on forget he lavish or the Baptiste occasion on and hospitable Who children - receptions substantial of
 Baptiste his could occasion - of . Who on put substantial the celebrate hospitable receptions of Jean the forget the Saint children marriage the spread lavish or and he on - to
 the of hospitable - Who receptions Saint celebrate forget could on . Baptiste lavish marriage children substantial - occasion the on spread he his or to and put of Jean the the
 to children the - occasion the Who Baptiste of . substantial hospitable receptions and or of on celebrate lavish spread Saint put forget his could on Jean the he - the marriage
 occasion - could . forget Baptiste the the he - lavish children to receptions of on his on the celebrate the Jean hospitable and spread put of Who marriage Saint or substantial
 . put marriage of the Saint on he and spread lavish hospitable Who forget the substantial receptions of or the Baptiste children the his celebrate on - Jean to could - occasion
 hospitable or lavish the the the - of and occasion Baptiste could - substantial celebrate forget spread on he marriage put receptions Who to Saint of Jean his children the on .
 of Jean the his marriage Baptiste put - the Who children occasion he and to on receptions forget substantial or . on lavish the the could celebrate Saint of hospitable spread -
We do not have to take orders. 
We must do what is right.  
This bill has important consequences for many of us, and more particularly, for our children and our grandchildren. 
Those people who are already retired and at the age of 65 will receive all their benefits. 
For those people who are in the middle and who will soon be retiring, it is not a big problem for them. 
They will have some reduced benefits and some increased costs. 
To those people who have been paying all their lives - that is, all the baby boomers who will begin to turn 50 - they will receive benefits and be faced with another 15 years of increased costs.  
I will tell you for whom this is important. 
I have a daughter who is 24 and a son who is 21. 
Many of you have children and grandchildren. 
The government is asking them to pay 9.9 per cent - I am sure it is 9.9 per cent because the minister wanted the number to be under the figure 10. That represents 10 per cent of their income, and it will increase with inflation. 
The $35,000 that they pay on today will inevitably be more tomorrow.  
As inflation eats away at it and the numbers rise, that number remains the same. 
This goes against everything we have ever done on this program since its inception in 1966. 
It stays the same. 
In 10 or 15 years, that $3,500 will be worth $1,500, $1,000, $500, depending on what government does and what happens to inflation.  
Senator Taylor :
Elect the Liberals and it will be high!  
Senator Tkachuk :
If we elect the Liberals, inflation will be high? 
 Who could forget the lavish receptions on the occasion of the marriage of his children or the substantial and hospitable spread he put on to celebrate Saint Jean - Baptiste .
 put children occasion the on could to Saint or his the receptions celebrate hospitable the Who - marriage of lavish Baptiste forget spread he substantial of . and the Jean on
 the lavish - he Who - the forget Jean occasion spread on the hospitable Saint put on of marriage Baptiste his or children . of receptions substantial the to and could
 Who of . spread the of hospitable his children celebrate Baptiste to on and Saint forget could occasion - Jean or the marriage the receptions on substantial lavish he the put
Also, and more importantly, there were his many acts of kindness to his Quebec or Mexican employees or his Italian compatriots. 
 or his Quebec compatriots kindness and employees his . or his many , were Also more Mexican of acts to Italian , there importantly
 employees or and to compatriots many acts of . Quebec were importantly his more , Italian his or there Mexican Also kindness his ,
 , his to more Quebec kindness importantly there . Mexican , employees of or or Also many and acts Italian his his were compatriots
 acts importantly kindness his employees . of Quebec his Italian were many compatriots more or there and Mexican Also , , his or to
 were kindness Italian of employees , many his or Quebec or acts there Mexican and Also . compatriots to his more his importantly ,
 , or employees Mexican or Also there his importantly compatriots to acts many his Italian were . kindness and , Quebec his of more
 compatriots were acts employees . or his there Quebec his Mexican kindness and more of many , importantly , his Italian or to Also
 acts , or his many Also . were his compatriots his more kindness Mexican importantly to employees or Quebec there , Italian of and
 his Also more Mexican or . , there many kindness to and his Italian his , or importantly of employees compatriots Quebec acts were
 Italian or or were Mexican . his employees compatriots many kindness Quebec importantly of there , to Also his his acts more and ,
 Quebec or importantly Mexican kindness his and Italian many , Also . of his to were compatriots or there more his employees acts ,
 or acts Quebec , his employees importantly there many , more kindness or Mexican Also of Italian to . his were compatriots his and
 , Quebec or Italian were and compatriots his kindness Mexican his his importantly many , or more . there employees of acts to Also
 many were , and his Also his to . his acts or or Mexican more there Quebec employees Italian importantly of , compatriots kindness
 , kindness or his , many and of were to employees Italian Quebec compatriots his Mexican Also there . his importantly acts more or
 , there or and employees more his of importantly were Also acts or , to Quebec Italian his many compatriots . his kindness Mexican
This means that there would be at least four mandatory and separate school boards, including two with three mandatory sectors each and two others with two mandatory sectors each. 
As the witness said, there would be a superimposition of organizational structures. 
The same thing would happen in Quebec City. 
This would create unnecessary costs and complications in the annual registration of students, the assignment of personnel, the distribution of resources and the establishment of voters' lists.  
Some of the witnesses who appeared before the special joint committee seem to think that the debate on education that has been going on for over 30 years in Quebec is not only about freeing the Government of Quebec of the restrictions resulting from paragraphs (1) to (4) of section 93. 
But even if that were the case, in the five extensive public consultations carried out over the past five years, the reform of public education in Quebec was the major issue - and it is the organizational structures guaranteed by section 93 which obviously are impeding this reform. 
This very public debate necessarily raised the question of whether the Constitution should be amended to solve this problem.  
After hearing the witnesses, the committee was satisfied that a majority of Catholic and Protestant parents - the two groups concerned - supported the amendment to section 93.  
One aspect of the issue that was frequently mentioned is the Quebec National Assembly's unanimous support of Bill 109 and the amendment to section 93. 
Such unanimous votes are significant, but they do not mean there is a consensus in the Catholic and Protestant communities, whose privileges are at stake. 
Such unanimity in the Quebec National Assembly proves nevertheless that support for the amendment transcends party lines. 
The PQ government was reluctant to propose that amendment, because it involved using the amending formula provided for in the Constitution Act of 1982, which that government refuses to recognize. 
The government finally yielded to the pressures from Liberal opposition members.  
Some people were concerned that the debate on national unity might detract from the substance of the amendment. 
If the only concern of the special joint committee had been to prove that "federalism works," it would not have insisted on hearing this evidence showing that there was a consensus among Catholic and Protestant parents. 
From the very beginning, the Government of Quebec assured this Parliament that there was an appropriate consensus in favour of the amendment in that province. 
However, the committee insisted on assessing and challenging these statements - so much so that the Quebec ministers responsible for education and for intergovernmental affairs eventually appeared before the committee, along with the official opposition critics on these matters. 
Clearly, what was - and still is - at issue is the legitimacy of the amendment.  
It was mentioned repeatedly that, as a result of the Supreme Court decisions, it has become obvious that the rights that are positively guaranteed under section 93 are not as broad as they were originally assumed to be. 
However, we do not believe that the amendment was justified because the denominational education rights guaranteed under section 93 were nothing more than empty shells. 
 Also , and more importantly , there were his many of kindness to his Quebec or Mexican employees or his Italian compatriots .
 . importantly many and kindness were , compatriots more his Quebec of Also Mexican employees his or acts there , or to his
 his acts were . , or his importantly and to , Mexican Quebec Italian his or of more kindness there many employees Also
 , employees compatriots importantly and kindness acts were his of or . there Italian his his Mexican more Quebec or many to ,
We need only think of the vital role he played in raising several million dollars in Canada for the people of Friuli in northern Italy, who were victims of a disastrous earthquake. 
 raising dollars played earthquake he Canada million in in . need of who in Italy Friuli think of victims a role only for , of We disastrous were several the vital people the northern
 of victims raising think role a were need , played disastrous for the million dollars several he Canada earthquake northern Italy We vital . who in in of Friuli people in of only the
 of think of played in Friuli the who a victims only were need people Canada vital dollars in disastrous of he in the We several Italy for million , . role raising northern earthquake
 in , dollars who We for . earthquake in disastrous Friuli of Italy a of played in victims of the people Canada million he were only need think vital the several role northern raising
 We million people of only of earthquake disastrous northern in victims the a in for Canada , in Friuli need were played vital he raising who Italy dollars think several . the of role
 victims the several Canada a We who in northern the need Friuli vital of of million of in for were in played think , Italy . only he earthquake raising dollars people disastrous role
 the , earthquake disastrous several he Canada who vital of northern of role need victims in think of in raising only Italy for people Friuli a in We . dollars million played were the
 . in a of who earthquake northern Italy the disastrous in only he for We vital dollars were several , raising victims of people in need of played role million the think Canada Friuli
 played role in were million Italy . the We need Canada only of disastrous dollars of vital he in raising people , for victims a earthquake several think the who northern Friuli in of
 think in victims a Italy We for dollars he in need raising only people were of in played of role Canada million the of earthquake Friuli disastrous who several . the vital , northern
 of a We dollars he vital of in , for Italy raising role earthquake people who million played think in disastrous Friuli victims were northern several the of only need Canada the in .
 think disastrous . for the million of people We several who role in Italy Friuli northern he , need a were of played raising only earthquake Canada dollars victims the in in vital of
 for victims he Italy only Canada who in dollars raising , of in need Friuli of disastrous northern role . the million of earthquake were people We vital in played think several the a
 several , a earthquake Canada Friuli vital the the were need for northern raising of played of dollars think who people in of We only in role million in he Italy disastrous victims .
 in the We in Canada role the , were think who Italy earthquake people disastrous a need played of of Friuli only for . northern in dollars of raising several he million vital victims
 people . in role Friuli disastrous for in of a million who We of in played several victims northern the of need were the only Canada raising think he , dollars vital earthquake Italy
That is not the question.  
Senator Grafstein :
That is what the Constitution says.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
I do not disagree.  
Senator Grafstein :
That is what section 93 says.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
No, section 93 does not say that.  
Senator Grafstein :
The Province of Quebec, by its lawfully elected assembly, has requested a resolution amending the Constitution. 
How can I ask them to respect the Constitution if I do not respect the Constitution? 
I respect the Constitution.  
Honourable senators, this is a lawful request done in a lawful way. 
Perhaps certain words are egregious, but it is done in a lawful way, and I am prepared to support them. 
To my mind, the fact that they are prepared to proceed with their reforms before we legislate in any way, shape or form is their business; it is not my business. 
My business is to uphold the Constitution when they request we uphold processes under the Constitution.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
The reform of the school system in Quebec has nothing to do with the Constitution, even less with section 93. 
That was admitted in front of the committee.  
 We need only of the vital role he played in raising several million dollars in Canada for the people of Friuli in northern Italy , who were victims of a disastrous earthquake .
 need he a of vital think victims were . Italy disastrous several for only in in who the northern in played earthquake dollars of Friuli , of role raising We million people the
 need raising northern We million Italy of vital a who of . earthquake Canada only the for Friuli in role he dollars several think disastrous the , in played in were people victims
 who were in . the role of he victims northern need people disastrous raising of Canada million in several the played only think in , dollars Italy for a earthquake of We vital
He was generous with his possessions, his time, his energy, and most importantly with his heart. 
 most his He was his , energy with time heart his possessions importantly . , , and generous with his
 , importantly with possessions time , generous , his and energy He with his was his most heart . his
 energy heart his possessions his , importantly , was his , He with with most . time and generous his
 energy , most his time his generous He , . his possessions with with and his was heart importantly ,
 , and , generous with , He with his most heart his energy time his was . importantly his possessions
 was , with his energy heart time most . He his generous , importantly with possessions and his his ,
 energy was , . with importantly possessions most He his and his generous his his with heart , , time
 with He his importantly . his with and possessions was heart energy , , generous , his time most his
 his was , , his . most his importantly time and with energy possessions , his heart generous with He
 generous time . He heart , his importantly his , energy with his most , was his and with possessions
 energy generous his most with and possessions heart . was , He importantly , with time his his his ,
 heart , with his possessions was , his . his energy and his , importantly most He with generous time
 , his , with his energy time was , possessions generous heart and his with importantly most his He .
 was possessions with his energy . heart , importantly , his , with He most generous time his his and
 importantly He his , with heart possessions . energy , his , most time his his generous was and with
 heart importantly his , was , his with and most with He possessions generous energy his his time . ,
Parents already have a say in how much religion they want their children exposed to and that will continue under the new system.  
While section 93 guarantees are only a matter of religious denominations, the essential characteristics of the resulting Quebec school system have, nonetheless, been linguistic. 
One does not speak often of going to a Catholic or Protestant school any more. 
One usually speaks of going to a French or an English school. 
It was inevitable, then, that the committee would be drawn into a debate on how the amendment of section 93 might affect linguistic rights, particularly those claimed by the minority.  
While section 23 of the Charter establishes minority linguistic education rights, Quebec is not bound by all its provisions and so has adopted legislation in this field which, in effect, creates two classes of English-speaking Quebecers as it distinguishes between those educated in Canada and those educated elsewhere. 
Only those parents educated in English in Canada can pass on the benefit of minority English language education to their children. 
Those Quebec parents who were educated in English outside of Canada must have their children educated in French. 
We have in Quebec two classes of English-speaking Quebecers.  
Quebec has been repeatedly criticized for this discrimination, and rightly so. 
How this undesirable situation developed can be traced to the then Minister of Justice, who is Prime Minister today.  
I will quote from his book, Straight from the Heart , where Mr. Chrétien describes how he was responsible for exempting Quebec from the crucial parts of section 23. 
He says: 
During the weeks that followed, I continued to try to overcome Quebec's objections, to the extent of modifying the principle of minority language education and agreeing to fiscal compensation when Quebec opted out of amendments that affected culture and education. 
That required a hell of a lot of selling to Trudeau, but he went along in the end, as did the nine other premiers, who were willing to reopen their sealed bargain in order to bring in Quebec. 
Mr. Chrétien goes on to say: 
I used to joke that these were the first constitutional amendments in history to have been negotiated over the telephone.  
Let it be noted that Mr. Chrétien takes pride of authorship - "of modifying the principle of minority education...". 
He boasts of getting the agreement of then Prime Minister Trudeau and the nine other premiers, and finds it amusing that this inexcusable abandonment of a fundamental principle was secured over the telephone.  
Honourable senators, Quebec's partial exemption from section 23 was initiated and approved by Mr. Chrétien by including the following in the Constitution Act, 1982: 
 He was generous with his possessions , his time , energy , and most importantly with his heart .
 his generous , importantly energy his , with was most with possessions and . heart his time He his
 importantly his . with He his , with his generous possessions heart time his energy was and most ,
 most energy possessions his with and generous his his , his time He was heart importantly , , with
We saw this generosity in action not only here but in Nuevo Vallarta in Mexico and in the village of his birth in Sicily. 
 Nuevo here only birth Sicily in village this in action in of saw not generosity Mexico . his but the and Vallarta in in We
 action We this not generosity in and the . of in birth Mexico Vallarta in Sicily in but his in only Nuevo village saw here
 but Mexico in birth here in . in and action We saw not this Nuevo in only village of in generosity the Sicily his Vallarta
 in in Mexico Nuevo here Vallarta . his in but village in saw birth We action this the Sicily generosity in only and not of
 but Vallarta Nuevo birth this his village and in generosity saw here Mexico in in only action the Sicily in of We not in .
 in We in village action of not Mexico Sicily but his Nuevo in generosity birth Vallarta . this in in and only saw the here
 Mexico of but Nuevo in generosity We Sicily here only in in . this Vallarta birth action and in saw village in his not the
 Vallarta action Nuevo but this only his in birth Mexico We in Sicily . generosity in in saw not and here of village in the
 of the action We in and in not saw here birth his in . in in this but Nuevo Mexico village Sicily only Vallarta generosity
 action this not in Vallarta and Mexico saw in . but in only generosity We Nuevo here the of village in his in Sicily birth
 the this his Vallarta in in Mexico in Sicily only but Nuevo of here . not and village in in birth saw generosity We action
 and but generosity here Nuevo in birth . saw of Vallarta Sicily in his only in We Mexico the not this village in in action
 . generosity We of the Mexico and in saw this here but Nuevo in in his in Vallarta Sicily not only action in birth village
 in in Vallarta village . saw of birth in in Sicily and this his Mexico here Nuevo generosity We in the only action not but
 his and Mexico . Nuevo this action in in not only but birth saw here in village generosity of in We the in Sicily Vallarta
 and in . Mexico generosity in Nuevo birth Vallarta village only Sicily but here in in not of this We his in the saw action
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, I regret to interrupt the honourable senator, but his allotted time has expired.  
Senator Stratton :
I would like to finish my speech, if I may.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is leave granted for Honourable Senator Stratton to continue?  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
Senator Stratton :
Thank you, senators.  
In the Financial Post or The Globe and Mail it was recently explained that, as employers will have to pay higher CPP premiums and as most employers or companies have a limited budget for wages, they will have to pass on the cost to people through the price of their product, or they will have to lay people off, or they will have to go to contract workers.  
The concern is the long-term effect this huge increase will have on full-time jobs.  
On November 18, Senator Oliver said: 
Canadians who turn 69, 70, and 71 this year have only another month and a half to convert their RRSPs to an annuity or a RRIF. 
If they fail to do so, they could lose up to one-half of every dollar they have in their RRSPs to taxes; yet many of these same Canadians are not aware that the government has lowered the age to 69 and of the deadline for making the conversion.  
Indeed, a survey conducted last spring found that only about 30 per cent of RRSP holders aged 50 to 70 were aware of these new rules. 
Bearing this in mind, and considering the confusion that now exists about this matter, will the government consider extending the conversion time so as to ensure that no senior citizen is forced to hand over half of his or her life savings as a result of being caught off-guard by this proposal?  
In other words, will the government ensure that they are not nailed with more taxes?  
Senator Oliver continued: 
We were told that the net tax grab from this and other measures that restrict tax assistance for retirement savings, notably yet another freeze in RRSP contributions, would total about $40 million this year and $175 million next year. 
 We saw this generosity in action not only here but in Nuevo Vallarta in Mexico and in the village of his birth Sicily .
 Sicily in generosity Nuevo his the saw action in We village not in of here Mexico . but this Vallarta birth and in only
 Mexico only here action birth in this his but generosity in . We not in saw in and the Nuevo Sicily Vallarta in of
 generosity Nuevo We saw and in . his action Sicily this village in in birth in not Mexico only in Vallarta here the but
No individual, no matter how humble, failed to warrant his interest, his attention and his help. 
 , his attention failed individual to humble his help interest his how , matter and No no warrant . ,
 to his and , matter his . interest help attention how individual warrant his , no No failed humble ,
 No attention , to his humble and failed matter warrant interest individual , his no his how . , help
 individual matter his failed . No interest to his how , no help , warrant humble his , attention and
 individual help his failed and attention matter no his , how , humble , warrant interest No to his .
 , his how no his matter and , warrant his to interest attention No help failed , humble individual .
 to No individual no help how humble , his his matter , his warrant , . interest failed and attention
 warrant failed no attention , individual and his . to , how humble his his , interest help matter No
 failed his to , no his matter No how humble , interest help his . individual attention warrant and ,
 humble , and individual his no matter help failed his , attention , No his . warrant how to interest
 humble interest help warrant individual how matter failed his No , , his to no attention , . his and
 warrant No . individual failed help his interest and attention to no matter humble , his his how , ,
 warrant his how . humble his matter failed No his no individual and help to , , , interest attention
 failed his matter his how , No and individual attention to help , . interest no warrant humble his ,
 and matter individual , to attention how , failed no help his interest , humble his No . warrant his
 failed help interest , his and his warrant No individual attention to , how . , no matter his humble
I am sure the Prime Minister would take all of that into consideration.  
Senator Nolin :
The Supreme Court received the request from your government to decide on the issue of Quebec's secession. 
We will learn in all likelihood from the Supreme Court that the amending formula would be appropriate if Canadians agreed to allow one province to separate from the others. 
Have the Prime Minister, the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs or officials of your government had formal or informal discussions on this matter with the representatives of the nine other provinces?  
Senator Graham :
Not that I am aware, honourable senators. 
We are aware, of course, of the meetings that took place with the premiers in Calgary. 
We know there is a first ministers' conference later this week in Ottawa, at which this matter may or may not arise. 
However, I am not aware that there have been discussions, either formal or informal, between the Prime Minister and the premiers up to this point in time.  
Immigration 
Tracking and Detention of Unsuccessful Refugee Claimants-Government Position 
Hon. Donald H. Oliver :
Honourable senators, my question to the Leader of the Government in the Senate is a continuation of the line of questions I had for the honourable leader yesterday. 
Will the Leader of the Government tell this chamber what plans are being considered to detain those who are dangerous, or who are judged to be unlikely to depart of their own free will? 
Where will they be detained, and under what controls to ensure that Canadians are protected?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, I take my honourable friend's question seriously, as I did the questions he put yesterday. 
I am still attempting to obtain clarification for him on this matter as soon as possible.  
Detention Facilities for Refugee Claimants-Request for Particulars 
 No individual no matter how humble , failed to warrant his interest , his attention and his help .
 No how humble and attention individual , . help interest matter warrant his his , no his failed to
 to , help warrant No . how failed attention interest , , humble his individual his matter and his
 , and attention warrant to , no interest . his help his , his failed individual matter No how
In his adopted country and province, his generosity developed in him moderation and tolerance that stood him in particularly good stead as a leader of the Italian Canadian community by making it possible for this community to ease gently into Quebec society and Canadian society as a whole.  
 that society him ease and his . and a good community into In gently leader a by possible province tolerance stead it Canadian moderation and in making as for this country adopted whole as the society Italian generosity developed in Canadian of to Quebec , him stood community particularly his
 a it his particularly him leader the . tolerance good that ease him stood generosity into in in a moderation this , community Quebec as and Italian and In by to adopted Canadian society country society province for Canadian of community making his possible as whole developed stead gently and
 . him particularly ease province stood adopted , and making possible of community as Canadian good into the and whole in it community for a tolerance country moderation this to that by him society his a in developed as Quebec gently generosity Canadian leader Italian In stead and society his
 the that society as it for a particularly him and to possible in stood Italian his whole community of a society moderation Quebec tolerance good stead community In developed . this as and generosity gently leader his Canadian country making by into him adopted ease , in and Canadian province
 leader and and him particularly tolerance . adopted community of community making developed his the him society as this into and province Quebec Canadian country to possible for Canadian whole stead it , a gently good by Italian as a moderation ease his In that stood in in generosity society
 moderation to for Canadian ease developed into stood stead and it Canadian society and this country a in his his adopted tolerance particularly whole making community by a leader that community . him In good in , and possible as generosity gently of Quebec Italian him the as society province
 whole tolerance country this it leader Quebec community to and for community Italian ease developed that In Canadian , moderation a generosity possible . adopted as province a and of stood him stead him good and in as society society making particularly his gently the Canadian into by his in
 Canadian stood into moderation Canadian ease as community as and province . whole particularly developed society leader community country the his Quebec society him him making adopted In tolerance and this his generosity and by Italian stead good possible it , of gently a in a to in that for
 , community as province and Italian for generosity whole gently In society Canadian ease country leader . particularly stood making as possible stead his into society moderation his developed and that this and tolerance it the in good of him community him adopted a a by in Canadian Quebec to
 this society society good of as Italian him stead to adopted in whole that developed it him making tolerance moderation his community into the in a for stood by particularly possible country gently and and his Canadian and . province a , Canadian Quebec leader generosity ease In as community
 a to in community possible stead in and tolerance good the a , this community that society country society In him by particularly making Italian whole province stood as it his and developed Canadian leader generosity ease into his gently as Canadian adopted moderation him for and Quebec of .
 and for Italian particularly Canadian possible . a country a of good ease leader whole in moderation adopted it his province as this Quebec developed generosity tolerance stood and to in by Canadian and , stead society In community him his him society as making community gently that the into
 to into Canadian good in particularly and Canadian this community community as the in his In for it him by society as generosity stead whole of and stood Quebec . making leader , ease a Italian tolerance that his country province moderation and developed society gently a him possible adopted
 adopted it Italian his country this province gently community tolerance as Canadian ease and Quebec , particularly generosity whole him stead and a good into a Canadian in possible making and developed society moderation that community In for him as society leader of to the his by . stood in
 particularly and it Canadian , in Canadian making Italian ease the as In possible province as and by a that good society . moderation in whole for gently this leader developed and generosity community adopted his his of country stead into stood to him him tolerance a Quebec society community
 gently society adopted it into his good a him and him Italian that community province of and a , stood country in moderation for to leader Canadian stead as developed Quebec in generosity and . whole making community possible the Canadian In particularly ease society tolerance this by his as
That is what section 93 says.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
No, section 93 does not say that.  
Senator Grafstein :
The Province of Quebec, by its lawfully elected assembly, has requested a resolution amending the Constitution. 
How can I ask them to respect the Constitution if I do not respect the Constitution? 
I respect the Constitution.  
Honourable senators, this is a lawful request done in a lawful way. 
Perhaps certain words are egregious, but it is done in a lawful way, and I am prepared to support them. 
To my mind, the fact that they are prepared to proceed with their reforms before we legislate in any way, shape or form is their business; it is not my business. 
My business is to uphold the Constitution when they request we uphold processes under the Constitution.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
The reform of the school system in Quebec has nothing to do with the Constitution, even less with section 93. 
That was admitted in front of the committee.  
I will give you the answer to my question, and it should trouble all of us. 
The answer is that Quebec wants to be exempted from providing Catholic and Protestant teaching in the public school system. 
It has nothing to do with the linguistic school system, which will be in place - if the calendar is met - before the beginning of the next school year. 
They want to erase religious instruction from the school system, which is imposed on them. 
Narrow as it may be, unfair as it may be, and discriminatory as it may be, it was still renewed in 1982 and given protection from the Charter only 15 years ago. 
That is the reason. 
 In his adopted country and province , his generosity developed in him moderation and tolerance that stood him in particularly good stead as a leader of the Italian Canadian community by making it for this community to ease gently into Quebec society and Canadian society as a whole .
 Canadian into in possible as society developed generosity as Quebec moderation Italian that gently . of Canadian making his province community his a a society country community adopted and it stead by ease for in and the whole him him In to this , tolerance leader and good stood
 developed by a good in a community it Canadian stood for Canadian country this stead of and his and leader particularly that as . , society generosity tolerance as Italian whole him to society into possible him in moderation and In Quebec ease his adopted the gently community making
 good and whole Quebec possible him for province to as and society Canadian in adopted leader . and him particularly a this the that by it into community a of stood In , his Canadian in as tolerance society Italian ease gently making developed community country his moderation generosity
Later on, after becoming involved in Canadian politics, in difficult times when volunteers were few, he would take on major responsibilities in revitalizing his party - an unrewarding task if ever there was one.  
 task unrewarding , in responsibilities was were difficult politics an would if Canadian becoming when in . times involved his after , in revitalizing he few Later - volunteers on ever , on there party one major take
 would Canadian on one in . revitalizing , responsibilities task was difficult unrewarding volunteers major party if - take on few an becoming his he times ever there Later after politics involved when were , in in ,
 few Canadian would politics . take there in ever , task he were when on after his becoming in unrewarding if an - revitalizing was , volunteers involved on major times party Later , one in difficult responsibilities
 were . party was he few difficult in on after task in involved , would times one politics in his , Later volunteers an on Canadian take unrewarding revitalizing there - when major ever if , becoming responsibilities
 . Later politics after an would was major in revitalizing few - , were responsibilities becoming his in , one on take involved unrewarding volunteers if there in difficult on when ever party times Canadian , task he
 after when in times few his - were in an was there becoming he . major would , politics responsibilities difficult revitalizing volunteers Later take if , Canadian ever involved on task , unrewarding party on one in
 he responsibilities Canadian in after there unrewarding ever take Later , on revitalizing politics were , becoming - in difficult in , when was if . his an task would major volunteers one involved times few party on
 few he were politics ever volunteers in take there major party , difficult Later unrewarding in if - on becoming responsibilities involved , Canadian was . when would an in his on revitalizing times task , after one
 , he party politics on involved if take after an major revitalizing Canadian , Later . - becoming ever responsibilities in when volunteers few in would in difficult times were one on was his there task , unrewarding
 would on one few responsibilities in revitalizing when Later on in his volunteers ever in unrewarding an take politics he Canadian , difficult becoming was , task there party , . major were after if involved times -
 if - involved in after he in was his Later there task times few would difficult an in when were major revitalizing on on party , ever politics responsibilities take Canadian volunteers . unrewarding one becoming , ,
 Later on Canadian if on was volunteers were in becoming in responsibilities in few an task , he take times politics one there involved revitalizing ever , unrewarding when major difficult his . party would after - ,
 in volunteers difficult Later Canadian , few when were ever one , his on would task was party on responsibilities an . he times revitalizing in , politics - in major there involved take unrewarding becoming after if
 there in he Canadian , times major task involved was were party if politics revitalizing unrewarding when volunteers Later would his becoming on - ever , take on an in after in few responsibilities difficult . one ,
 task ever - . politics in major he unrewarding one there , in , were Canadian becoming after would party was , revitalizing when times take Later on in involved volunteers on if an his difficult responsibilities few
 - in becoming an one revitalizing difficult party volunteers Canadian he , there on Later politics ever task , were take was if his would few in when major times after in involved . responsibilities on , unrewarding
Even though most Canadian adults were eligible to vote by 1920, there is a final chapter that looks at ways to make voting accessible to everyone, including people in all geographic locations and people with physical disabilities.  
A History of the Vote in Canada is meant to be an educational resource and a reminder to Canadians of the significance of the right to vote. 
This is in keeping with Elections Canada's 1993 mandate to educate voters about the democratic right to vote.  
While this book will appeal to historians, political scientists, university and high school teachers and students, it is hoped that it will also reach those who may have difficulty exercising their right to vote.  
As parliamentarians, honourable senators, it is our role to help promote this book and educate our fellow citizens on their rights as voters.  
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
Report of Committee 
Hon. Ron Ghitter , Chair of the Standing Senate Committee on Energy, the Environment and Natural Resources, presented the following report: 
Tuesday, December 9, 1997 
The Standing Senate Committee on Energy, the Environment and Natural Resources has the honour to present its 
SECOND REPORT 
Respectfully submitted, 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this bill be read the third time?  
On motion of Senator Butts, bill placed on the Orders of the Day for third reading at the next sitting of the Senate.  
Income Tax Conventions Implementation Act, 1997 
Report of Committee 
Hon. Michael Kirby , Chairman of the Standing Senate Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce, presented the following report: 
Tuesday, December 9, 1997 
The Standing Senate Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce has the honour to present its 
 Later on , after becoming involved in Canadian politics , in difficult times when volunteers were , he would take on major responsibilities in revitalizing his party - an unrewarding task if ever there was one .
 in his involved volunteers revitalizing he there take were , after one ever an . major , Later on when party unrewarding times in in politics difficult few - would responsibilities task , Canadian was becoming if
 Canadian after party on Later task in times in on revitalizing would when , one if becoming politics volunteers few , . , were there - an take in his ever involved he responsibilities unrewarding difficult was
 volunteers on , involved would one unrewarding party in on in revitalizing responsibilities take times after was his there when he , difficult becoming an in if major - . task politics Later few were , ever
Finally, who can forget his natural nobility and Sicilian pride, so rightly deserved, that made Pietro so endearing? 
 so Finally endearing so Sicilian and , Pietro natural , his made rightly can that forget pride deserved , ? nobility who
 , who forget can Pietro , Finally endearing so his natural made , deserved pride ? Sicilian and rightly so nobility that
 endearing his made nobility forget natural that rightly so , and pride Sicilian can Pietro , deserved so ? Finally , who
 deserved , endearing nobility can Pietro so pride Finally ? who that , made so rightly , Sicilian his and natural forget
 , can , made deserved Finally so pride forget ? Sicilian that rightly his natural so Pietro and , nobility who endearing
 his forget who , rightly can nobility that and Finally , pride Sicilian ? natural made , Pietro endearing so so deserved
 pride and Sicilian , , so endearing deserved , Finally who ? Pietro can nobility that made his forget so rightly natural
 so endearing , that forget pride ? Pietro rightly nobility Sicilian Finally and , who made natural his can so , deserved
 so made deserved natural who Finally nobility Pietro forget and endearing rightly his that ? Sicilian , , so pride can ,
 so nobility pride Sicilian , so and his Pietro ? can natural , who that rightly Finally endearing , made deserved forget
 Sicilian deserved who , made forget so rightly so Finally , that and Pietro endearing , pride nobility ? natural can his
 ? natural nobility made , so who rightly forget can that , and pride , so Pietro deserved Sicilian Finally endearing his
 rightly so that Finally , made can Sicilian and endearing pride his , natural deserved so who , Pietro nobility ? forget
 and can , so who so natural forget nobility his endearing Finally Sicilian pride that , made deserved Pietro , rightly ?
 so nobility ? , who Sicilian , that natural rightly Finally his , Pietro made deserved endearing forget and can pride so
 Sicilian ? endearing and natural that Finally who made deserved so , nobility forget , his Pietro , can pride rightly so
What you are doing with this bill is giving enormous powers to a few people with money belonging to all Canadians, particularly the poor. 
It is serious because we do not know how long this will last. 
Bills at second reading are always good measures. 
I saw more than my share in 40 years. 
Ministers come up with their legislation and they promise miracles. 
Three years later we take stock and discover that things are not like they were supposed to be. 
The minister's comments do not have nearly the same impact after three years.  
I am not saying everything is managed perfectly in the private sector, but I will tell you that it is the people's own money. 
It is not public money. 
No one is forced to invest in Royal Trust.  
Senator Gigantès :
The public is made up of individuals. 
These individuals are private persons. 
Under the proposed system, they would invest in something which may not make huge profits, but which will not experience the disasters of the private sector.  
Senator Bolduc :
It is a matter of choice. 
Senator Gigantès :
With a system such as the one proposed, one thing is for sure. 
There will be no Trevor Eyton to squander the money, there will be no Conrad Black or Olympia & York to take it away from you.  
Senator Bolduc :
 Finally , can forget his natural nobility and Sicilian pride , so rightly deserved , that made Pietro so endearing ?
 Finally can rightly endearing , , Pietro and pride that , deserved made Sicilian ? who nobility his so so forget
 who so deserved can made , endearing his forget Sicilian pride so nobility , , that Finally Pietro and ? rightly
 , so forget Pietro so made can Finally rightly deserved nobility and , pride endearing ? that his , natural who
He taught us a virtue that is fading in this century, that of honour.  
 virtue that . taught century He that in this us of honour , is fading a
 this , virtue in that fading of a honour us . taught that century is He
 taught is in that . of fading honour a century that , He us virtue this
 He that taught . virtue century us a , fading is honour that this in of
 He . a is that that in fading us this of virtue , honour century taught
 taught century that . is virtue He , this in a fading of us that honour
 taught of fading He this , . honour is century a virtue that that in us
 in He virtue century . fading , that is this honour that us taught a of
 in century this He , . is taught that honour a virtue of us fading that
 fading honour . this in a century of that is , He that virtue taught us
 honour that in He century a , us is . fading virtue this of taught that
 He us is honour . taught that fading virtue century this , of a in that
 a taught century virtue this that honour in that , . is fading of He us
 a of that . He is , in virtue taught century fading honour this that us
 virtue us this honour , taught in . He that that a of fading century is
 virtue honour this that fading that taught , . us of is in a He century
I want to read those letters into the record because they are important.  
A different situation exists in Quebec. 
Nevertheless, our assembly did not oppose the choice to amend section 93. 
It has always been our conviction that the choice of means is the responsibility of the political authorities.  
They did not oppose.  
The Anglican Archbishop, Archbishop Andrew S. Hutchison, said the following at paragraph 2 of his letter dated November 3: 
The amendments proposed to Article 93 by the Quebec government, which would remove the obligation for the Quebec government to have confessional school boards, seems reasonable to us and in keeping with traditional positions enunciated by the Anglican church.  
Honourable senators, the senior representatives of the mainstream Roman Catholic and Protestant groups did not register their opposition to these changes. 
This does not mean that this exercise was one of perfection. 
Indeed, many of us remain unhappy and regret the federal government's position taken with 23(1)( a ) then and now. 
I share, with Senator Pitfield and others, concern in that respect. 
However, unfortunately, I have a memory, and I recall very well that the 1982 Constitution, for which Senator Pitfield was a senior federal advisor, was a minimalist not a maximalist document. 
It was Senator Pitfield and others in power at the time who determined that, in order to pass the 1982 Constitution, the Province of Quebec should be given the option of proclaiming section 23(1)( a ) and that the notwithstanding clause would be incorporated in the 1982 Constitution to eviscerate the charter, both serious sources of our current distress.  
Many of us objected strenuously then, and do now, to giving the Province of Quebec these options. 
However, that is history. 
Many of us objected to the notwithstanding clause pressed by the other provinces, particularly Manitoba. 
Senator Pitfield was there. 
He understood that. 
This I remember.  
However flawed the 1982 Constitution was with regard to these two aspects, the special joint committee shared a defining moment. 
 He taught us a virtue that is fading in this century , that honour .
 honour that century in is us a this . , that virtue taught fading He
 century , fading in virtue honour that a us . this is He taught of
 , a honour . this is He virtue taught us that fading of in that
I hope that someone will keep alive the memory of this man people know too little about by writing his story. 
 little someone this keep by hope memory I his will of story know that about the people writing alive man too .
 by that will too about of someone alive . keep hope story the writing people little memory his know man I this
 too this that of the memory someone hope little keep . man his story know by about I will people alive writing
 the writing know that story people someone his keep I hope too man memory alive . little this of about by will
 I story man by alive too the that about this writing memory will know of people his little keep hope someone .
 of story the alive little will his I know too man people by writing someone about keep hope this memory . that
 about I the little . that man people this memory alive of writing hope by too know his will story someone keep
 . by writing someone people memory I hope that about alive will his this story little too the man of keep know
 alive of will people about . someone little story know by I too this that memory the his man keep writing hope
 that story someone people his man writing I know keep hope this of will too little alive about memory by . the
 keep writing that the too by will this hope little . about know people alive someone memory I his man story of
 that alive hope this little story writing people the memory his will I keep . man about know too someone of by
 this hope . story someone know his people alive will too about by the writing that of little man memory keep I
 of man alive memory this little know someone about by too . keep writing people hope I his that the will story
 of this writing little keep story his memory hope will man I the know too alive about . people that someone by
 that this his will about I too little . keep the alive know man by of hope memory writing story people someone
It has nothing to do with the linguistic school system, which will be in place - if the calendar is met - before the beginning of the next school year. 
They want to erase religious instruction from the school system, which is imposed on them. 
Narrow as it may be, unfair as it may be, and discriminatory as it may be, it was still renewed in 1982 and given protection from the Charter only 15 years ago. 
That is the reason. 
Do we want to be party to that?  
Do not mix up the reform of the system with the taking away of constitutional, legal rights of two identifiable religious faiths. 
That is what we are being asked to do.  
My personal opinion is that religion should not be in the schools, but that is probably old-fashioned now. 
I do not know. 
However, I will not argue that point.  
I am saying to myself that here in this Parliament we are being asked to remove legal rights. 
I hope that Senator Grafstein will at least agree that the minister should come before us in Committee of the Whole when we come to the resolution, and be prepared to answer some of these questions.  
Will you agree with me that we invite the minister to attend and debate that and other questions?  
Senator Grafstein :
Honourable senators, I am trying to follow practice and procedure in the Senate. 
I am addressing the report of the special joint committee. 
For me, the question is elucidation for honourable senators to consider that report. 
To me, the evidence and the outcome are clear. 
There may be evidence in other places, and there may be views held by other people, but I had the evidence before the committee. 
I would not say it was totally unequivocal, but it was clear enough to satisfy me that there was a high enough hurdle having been passed to support the federal resolution. 
 I hope someone will keep alive the memory of this man people know too little about by writing his story .
 keep his will I story know people . little memory writing by of too someone about alive that this hope the
 I little story keep people alive writing will . by the man hope of too about know someone his that this
 story will too man hope I the about . know writing alive memory of that little people this keep by someone
They will find him a remarkable example of the huge contribution made to our country and province by the millions of men and women who, from all of the world's countries, have chosen to come here in the 20th century. 
 chosen who , here contribution They by ' the him century the in women 20th huge of all come to example will the , and remarkable made our province from have s the . to world of millions find countries men of country and a
 s made , example will our remarkable contribution the come men to world to women by province They of huge . and and country millions of the all , who the a have ' chosen countries 20th find him here century the in of from
 of our from men chosen and millions huge come 20th to by world and They country the made the find here , s of province who have , a of the ' contribution will . him to century in women all example countries the remarkable
 , a They the of , 20th province all here remarkable the contribution of countries chosen the of our who century to women come example from will and have . huge s made millions find and ' world him country by to men the in
 have come remarkable huge here in to our a world , contribution the 20th s men by and the . example him country of They , chosen countries find who of made to and all will ' women the from millions century province the of
 country from world and find the . in s the remarkable millions our They century 20th all will example of here contribution huge him of have province to to , ' , chosen and the by the of a who come women men countries made
 the made century province example and find will from a huge contribution of here . in by all , and have remarkable chosen of millions They him the who men women country come to ' to world the of 20th countries s , our the
 20th chosen our and in made country have world to . the century They all men by a the here who , huge from the millions come of of to find province will countries , example of remarkable s ' him the women and contribution
 by to the the will chosen millions made him , of 20th world the have come . a who here from They example to in our contribution century of , province and s ' and of all find men country the women remarkable huge countries
 contribution to province s find who the . come to in They the from by the our have of here of , of , chosen will men huge ' and and countries 20th country millions the all world example women remarkable century a made him
 contribution our of the country will chosen century come the , s by who of , to to women and millions huge and in remarkable countries the find him example ' here of have They province world all men . from a the made 20th
 century of to men . example s from chosen come of world find in and country all a of to him by made huge 20th the will countries millions They who contribution ' remarkable the , women the province our , the have and here
 the They chosen here a from century huge . example world women contribution countries the our all come to men and province to ' of find by made , will him s , the of who have millions and 20th the of country in remarkable
 20th to by example here millions find the world will of contribution century all and the of country , countries of a to men , They the in . who him s have made come and from ' province remarkable women chosen our the huge
 . of the have 20th , of here millions our the of century who to , made find country chosen the and come will province men world contribution the him remarkable ' huge example by to countries and from women a s all They in
 20th and millions province s the of from our contribution , by who of country countries here chosen have a to all They example will come made to the him huge ' men the of century world , the remarkable . in and find women
Notwithstanding the short time-frames allotted in our terms of reference and as referenced by Senator Lynch-Staunton, the committee clearly heard every viewpoint that people wished to express.  
I hear Senator Wood. 
I will deal with her concerns in a moment.  
While some individual groups did not give evidence, as pointed out by Senator Wood, I concluded that, having examined the materials from those groups, that their viewpoint was indeed expressed by others during the course of those hearings. 
I believe no viewpoint was excluded from our deliberations.  
The time frames in the hearings in no way diminished the committee's ability to obtain or weigh the evidence. 
The committee made a thorough investigation of that evidence. 
No point of view went unexamined, save for one raised by the Reform Party at the last minute, and I will deal with that later.  
Let me for a moment repeat what we heard. 
There was a unanimous resolution, save for two abstentions, from the Quebec assembly. 
We heard from the opposition in the assembly; the Quebec government itself; English and French school boards; Catholic, Protestant and other teachers' groups; archbishops of the Roman Catholic church and the Anglican archbishop of Quebec, which I will deal with later; minority groups including Jewish, Arab, non-Roman Catholic and other allophone groups; students groups, both English and French. 
All agreed that linguistic school boards, which were a direct consequence of this amendment, were desirable and progressive.  
There was some dissent. 
I will briefly touch on it, as did Senator Bolduc in his most insightful speech, especially with respect to the plight of certain French-speaking Protestants and certain English-speaking Catholics. 
There is no question at all that some in those groups feel detrimentally affected.  
Again, under the current Quebec law 109, the notwithstanding clauses had been included, both with respect to the Quebec Charter and the federal Charter of Rights and Freedoms, therefore allowing for denominational teaching to be continued in Quebec. 
How the Quebec government will ultimately continue to afford opportunities for denominational teaching is a much more difficult question to predict. 
However, it is clear to me, from all the evidence I heard and carefully cross-examined, that the majorities of the so-called minorities favoured this change. 
There appeared to be some exceptions at the outset that must be addressed.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
 They will find him a remarkable example of the huge contribution to our country and province by the millions of men and women who , from all of the world ' s countries , have chosen to come here in the 20th century .
 ' 20th and by our huge the , country contribution made and to They millions of come province s in him century remarkable countries find of chosen a world here all of to have . men example from , the who will the the
 century men women the the find to . example made s and of , ' 20th have our in of millions here the , world come from him province remarkable the They by country all contribution who a huge will chosen and to of
 millions him 20th ' made from to , our the province find here of men countries to , They century a all the by s example the chosen will and have . world of and huge country remarkable come contribution who in women of
It will serve as a source of inspiration to all those who, in the future, want to serve their fellow citizens asking nothing for themselves.  
 themselves citizens , the for , a their will want to fellow inspiration who future of those . all serve source in It serve to as asking nothing
 inspiration serve source serve to , as It for those , . their to in want citizens future all of will a the themselves asking fellow who nothing
 . inspiration serve the as themselves of for to serve source future will who want It citizens their , nothing all fellow asking , a to those in
 of , their want future those serve for It nothing themselves citizens source in to , to fellow the serve . as inspiration all asking will a who
 to a as serve It of will , . the who fellow to their asking , those want citizens all inspiration in themselves nothing source future serve for
 , those future citizens asking fellow the source . inspiration a want for themselves their will who to to all of in as serve nothing serve It ,
 for will those as want themselves , . a who to serve their future to the in of all fellow nothing inspiration , serve It source asking citizens
 It to to their source a inspiration fellow for serve all future will want themselves . asking , the nothing , in who citizens of as those serve
 a as those , want all who fellow asking future serve It of . themselves in for inspiration serve source will their nothing to the to citizens ,
 to source want to It for the asking those who serve nothing their all , . a future will , serve citizens in of inspiration as themselves fellow
 those in a fellow , to want . will of serve citizens It to who their all , inspiration for themselves serve as the source nothing future asking
 serve a their for themselves to of It all the to want future , in nothing who asking as source will citizens , serve . inspiration fellow those
 all asking It inspiration their source who serve the as nothing , to will . for , future citizens of a fellow those serve to in want themselves
 future for to asking fellow serve who their the serve themselves those It will as nothing source , inspiration all citizens to of . want a in ,
 those , serve will themselves who It to citizens all asking in as future their . nothing inspiration fellow source a want for of to the serve ,
 those serve who the themselves want serve will for to all citizens . , as of to future asking fellow nothing inspiration their , a source It in
It is my interpretation that they still possess that authority. 
It is not enshrined in the Criminal Code. 
It is one of those principles that came into our law from the British system. 
As Senator Cools pointed out, no statute was broken. 
Therefore, the federal requirement that all federal laws must comply with the Charter of Rights and Freedoms was not affected.  
Yesterday, Senator Beaudoin was explaining the different parts of the Constitution, the British North America Act of 1867, the Charter of Rights, and so on. 
At times, it appears the Supreme Court of Canada considers that the Constitution consists only of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 
Despite all the evidence - the stolen truck, the blood on the accused - the judges were only interested in one thing, and that was the arrest warrant. 
There was no warrant because the police acted on the spot when they had the accused, and I think they acted quite properly.  
Honourable senators, the Supreme Court ignored the rights of Mr. Boyle. 
Section 7 of the Charter indicates that Mr. Boyle had the right to life, privacy and security of the person, and those rights were not to be taken from him except by and in accordance with the principles of fundamental justice.  
I think the justices of the Supreme Court of Canada should be sent a message reminding them that the victim also had rights under the Charter.  
In all fairness, honourable senators, I must say that three of the justices dissented with the majority decision. 
They felt the police action had no bearing or outcome on the decision. 
The chief justice came down the middle and quoted the decision made by former chief justice Brian Dickson, which I understand finds that, if the subject is not spelled out in the Constitution, it is implied as being there. 
However, there again, that is merely my interpretation.  
I emphasize again that Mr. Boyle had the right to his life. 
He had the right to have a vehicle and operate it, and he had the right to have money in his possession. 
All those were taken away from him, and all the Supreme Court of Canada could think of was that piece of paper called a "warrant" and to criticize the police for not having such a document.  
I wanted to suggest that perhaps criminals should apply for a warrant before they commit murder, but I do not want to pursue that because I am afraid that some Charter judge will give them a warrant or a licence to do so. 
 It will serve a source of inspiration to all those who , in the future , want to serve their fellow citizens asking nothing for themselves .
 future inspiration themselves . want It all who , in a asking those serve to to will source the serve as of nothing citizens , their fellow
 serve to want , of fellow inspiration asking their for all citizens a as It . to themselves future source who will , in nothing serve the
 to fellow for asking all will inspiration their . serve those of a who serve the nothing , in as citizens , future want It source themselves
Arrivederci, Pietro. 
 Arrivederci Pietro , .
 Pietro Arrivederci . ,
 Arrivederci Pietro , .
 Arrivederci . , Pietro
 Pietro Arrivederci , .
 , Pietro Arrivederci .
 , Arrivederci Pietro .
 , Pietro Arrivederci .
 , Arrivederci Pietro .
 . Arrivederci , Pietro
 . Arrivederci , Pietro
 . , Pietro Arrivederci
 , Pietro Arrivederci .
 , Pietro . Arrivederci
 Pietro , . Arrivederci
 Arrivederci Pietro . ,
If the request speaks to a Tuesday or a Thursday, when we normally meet at 2 p.m. and sit a little longer, there would be no difficulty, all things being equal, in granting leave. 
However, I am having some difficulty in granting leave for a day when we are supposed to be having a short day in any event.  
I would ask the honourable Chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee if he would explain his motion in light of the fact that Wednesday is a short day.  
Senator Stewart :
Honourable senators, there are two points:
First, we are hoping tomorrow to have a timely assessment of the achievements of the APEC meetings.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Watch out for the pepper spray!  
Senator Stewart :
The second point relates to the request for permission to meet tomorrow at 3:15 p.m. although the Senate may be then sitting. 
If I felt secure in the prognosis that the Senate would rise at three o'clock - which is the assumption on which we base our start time of 1:30 p.m. - I certainly would not undertake to put forward this motion. 
However, past experience suggests that, notwithstanding the fact that we do meet on Wednesdays at 1:30 p.m., we often sit well beyond three o'clock. 
On one occasion we had witnesses waiting for upwards of an hour.  
Senator Kinsella :
Thank you, Senator Stewart.  
Perhaps I might address the Deputy Leader of the Government, then. 
By way of recapitulation, this issue is important for all honourable senators. 
A request for leave has been made by the Chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee to allow that committee to sit tomorrow, Wednesday, even though the Senate may then be sitting. 
The issue is that Wednesday, in our common understanding, was to be a short day to allow committees to sit on Wednesday afternoons.  
Not just today but at other times, Senator Stewart has brought to our attention the fact that committees operate on that assumption and arrange their business plans, only to be frustrated in executing their business plan by the Senate going way beyond 3:00 or 3:30 p.m. on Wednesday afternoons.  
 , Pietro .
 Arrivederci Pietro ,
 Pietro . Arrivederci
 , . Pietro
Non ti dimenticheremo. 
 dimenticheremo . ti Non
 . dimenticheremo ti Non
 Non dimenticheremo ti .
 . Non dimenticheremo ti
 Non ti dimenticheremo .
 Non dimenticheremo ti .
 . ti Non dimenticheremo
 ti . dimenticheremo Non
 Non . ti dimenticheremo
 dimenticheremo . Non ti
 ti Non . dimenticheremo
 . Non ti dimenticheremo
 ti dimenticheremo . Non
 dimenticheremo Non ti .
 . Non dimenticheremo ti
 dimenticheremo ti . Non
No one is forced to invest in Royal Trust.  
Senator Gigantès :
The public is made up of individuals. 
These individuals are private persons. 
Under the proposed system, they would invest in something which may not make huge profits, but which will not experience the disasters of the private sector.  
Senator Bolduc :
It is a matter of choice. 
Senator Gigantès :
With a system such as the one proposed, one thing is for sure. 
There will be no Trevor Eyton to squander the money, there will be no Conrad Black or Olympia & York to take it away from you.  
Senator Bolduc :
I do not want to answer questions on specific cases, because I find it objectionable.  
Hon. Gerry St. Germain :
Honourable senators, the honourable senator who has just spoken brings a wealth of experience to this chamber. 
He was one of the top bureaucrats and one of the top men in the Quebec government at one time. 
He brings that experience to this forum.  
I would prefer to ask this question of the government side, but no one will speak further on it. 
Therefore, I will ask Senator Bolduc.  
This involves a question that I asked Senator Kirby yesterday. 
It is a question of accountability. 
 Non ti dimenticheremo
 Non dimenticheremo .
 . Non ti
 Non dimenticheremo ti
We will not forget you.  
 not you forget We . will
 We will . you not forget
 you forget . We will not
 you not forget . We will
 forget will We you . not
 not . will forget We you
 We you forget will . not
 will you . not We forget
 not forget We . you will
 We will . forget you not
 you forget . not We will
 We you not will forget .
 not will . We you forget
 will forget We . you not
 . not forget you will We
 will forget not We you .
I want to make specific reference to this point because I have some personal experience in this regard. 
Access to public funding in Quebec for denominational education remains available in Quebec. 
I find it hard to believe how the Province of Quebec in the future, even if the notwithstanding clauses are removed, would not continue to fund denominational training. 
Whether it is through a charter school, a public school system, or through a publicly funded private school system, denominational training to all groups, in my view, will continue in the province of Quebec for the foreseeable future.  
Since we are projecting the future, that is my prediction for the future.  
I wish to mention yet another aspect of the testimony referred to in the Reform Party opinion which is appended to the report.  
At the last minute, after all the testimony was taken, the Reform members of the committee introduced a long petition containing thousands of names objecting to the federal resolution. 
Every opportunity was presented for these voices to be heard during the course of the hearings. 
We did not deny them an opportunity to be heard. 
On the other hand, we were not given an opportunity by the Reform Party to cross-examine those petitioners or to decide what weight, if any, we should give to their petition.  
I concluded, honourable senators, that the overwhelming evidence was that the majority of the minorities affected by these rights and privilege were in favour of the amendments.  
The Roman Catholic Archbishops of Quebec and the Anglican Archbishop have letters on record in which they clearly indicate they did not oppose the amendment.  
I want to read those letters into the record because they are important.  
A different situation exists in Quebec. 
Nevertheless, our assembly did not oppose the choice to amend section 93. 
It has always been our conviction that the choice of means is the responsibility of the political authorities.  
They did not oppose.  
The Anglican Archbishop, Archbishop Andrew S. Hutchison, said the following at paragraph 2 of his letter dated November 3: 
The amendments proposed to Article 93 by the Quebec government, which would remove the obligation for the Quebec government to have confessional school boards, seems reasonable to us and in keeping with traditional positions enunciated by the Anglican church.  
Honourable senators, the senior representatives of the mainstream Roman Catholic and Protestant groups did not register their opposition to these changes. 
 We will forget you .
 will not forget We you
 will not forget you .
 forget . you We will
Hon. Léonce Mercier :
 : Léonce Hon Mercier .
 . : Hon Mercier Léonce
 Léonce Mercier Hon . :
 . Mercier Hon : Léonce
 Hon : Léonce . Mercier
 . : Léonce Hon Mercier
 : Hon . Mercier Léonce
 Mercier . Hon : Léonce
 Léonce Mercier : . Hon
 . Hon Léonce Mercier :
 . : Léonce Mercier Hon
 Hon : Léonce . Mercier
 : Léonce Hon Mercier .
 Mercier . : Hon Léonce
 Hon : Léonce . Mercier
 Hon : . Mercier Léonce
Honourable senators, Quebec's partial exemption from section 23 was initiated and approved by Mr. Chrétien by including the following in the Constitution Act, 1982: 
59(1) Paragraph 23(1)( a ) shall come into force in respect of Quebec on a day to be fixed by proclamation issued by the Queen or the Governor General under the Great Seal of Canada.  
(2) A proclamation under subsection (1) shall be issued only where authorized by the legislative assembly or government of Quebec. 
Section 23(1)( a ), from which Quebec is exempted by the authors of the Constitution Act themselves, requires that Canadian citizens: 
Finally, I want to comment on the notion of joint committees, particularly those charged with studying a particular item within a given period. 
It was said here, and repeated before the committee, that participation by the Senate must not be interpreted as an abandonment by it of the obligations imposed on the Senate in matters of constitutional amendments. 
It is true that, alone, we cannot defeat an amendment of this nature, as the Senate may be overruled by the House of Commons. 
However, as was shown in the case of the first Term 17 resolution, although the Senate impact on a constitutional amendment is limited, its efforts in this regard can be most constructive. 
I am convinced that if the amendments to it, which the Senate forwarded to the House, had been accepted, Parliament would not be faced with a second Term 17 resolution as it is now, as the Senate amendments satisfied the affected minorities while respecting the Government of Newfoundland's objectives.  
The joint committee was not given enough time to review the Quebec resolution with the care it deserved. 
Witnesses were impressive in numbers, but time restrictions affected their presentations, and questions and answers were too often incomplete when they were not cut short. 
Joint committees of this sort benefit the government, not Parliament, as they are limited in both latitude and independence by the government's control over their agenda. 
This is not meant as a reflection on the work done by the co-chairmen or those who participated on the committee, who I again thank for their excellent work, in particular the co-chairmen, for they toiled under difficult circumstances. 
It is a comment on the concept itself and one, I gather, which can also be applied to the joint committee which has just completed its study of the proposed amendment to Term 17.  
Should joint committees become the rule rather than the exception, and two-thirds of the membership is drawn from the House of Commons, how can one expect sober second thought to win even persuasive arguments? 
That is why it is essential that a constitutional amendment be thoroughly reviewed by the Senate, otherwise we will be party to the Commons always having its will on us.  
The following, taken from the joint committee report, was not included as an afterthought, I can assure honourable senators: 
Sixteen Members of the House of Commons, and seven Senators, were named to this Special Joint Committee. 
Some of those Senators have stated that their participation in the Committee must in no way be seen as absolving them, or their Senate colleagues, from the Senate's constitutional obligation to assess any amendment proposed to the Constitution of Canada.  
I am already hearing cries of alarm from those who will claim that the Senate, by adopting this attitude, will cause a delay which could compromise the reforms the Government of Quebec has in mind. 
 Hon . Léonce Mercier
 Léonce . Hon :
 Hon : Léonce Mercier
 Hon Léonce Mercier :
Honourable senators, it is with great emotion that I am going to speak to you today of a man who was both a colleague and a very dear friend, Senator Pietro Rizzuto. 
 colleague Senator is it , was man senators friend speak great emotion a going am Rizzuto a both very Honourable dear of to . Pietro , to who and with today that you a I
 is a Senator Rizzuto today you that to of a dear , senators am , speak colleague man it I to very emotion and with friend going both . Honourable a who was Pietro great
 a and with you a it speak friend to of was senators Honourable to am man who emotion Senator great going colleague that Pietro is , I dear . very a , Rizzuto today both
 am , dear with to was Honourable a a Senator it colleague man Pietro . I a , great today who speak is very emotion Rizzuto and senators you friend to both going that of
 am Pietro friend a a speak emotion man both dear , a , who is Honourable it you and with that Senator great to was colleague going today to I senators Rizzuto very . of
 colleague senators a Senator dear friend who Pietro , speak it you going great with emotion that very . Honourable both to today I Rizzuto a and , to am man is a was of
 who of , a , a man I colleague Honourable today that Senator a and Pietro . emotion am with very was both is great dear speak it Rizzuto going senators friend to you to
 friend am dear a emotion was with great you colleague speak a Honourable Rizzuto to it that , Senator of . Pietro and who a going senators is to both today I man very ,
 going a emotion that friend was both Honourable , Senator , a and who to a you Rizzuto I is am with Pietro . man dear today it very of to senators great speak colleague
 a . that Honourable it , senators a great , am and with very colleague to man of a Pietro Rizzuto is going emotion Senator who I you speak was both friend dear today to
 colleague today Honourable you , friend to was am that , a a is a . I great going speak dear of Rizzuto very Senator it with to man senators emotion and Pietro who both
 am Pietro a is it speak you , going a very today , that I friend emotion was and senators both Senator a man of dear . to great with Rizzuto who Honourable to colleague
 that colleague with very and . to man am , Rizzuto Honourable dear today a a who emotion , Pietro going it speak is to was I great Senator you senators friend of a both
 emotion great who Pietro am , to today senators both to speak dear man Rizzuto colleague it I was is of a and you going Honourable a a very with . , Senator that friend
 it I to who dear and was Senator going that of great Rizzuto Pietro , is to very a friend . , a today senators with speak man a am colleague both you Honourable emotion
 friend , of emotion speak both am it dear very I that you Honourable going a Rizzuto Senator a colleague . is senators man to today was with who to Pietro and , great a
This bill was brought in last week so that we could work on it. 
Now, we must complete that work and pass the bill by Christmas. 
I do not think that we are handmaidens. 
We do not have to take orders. 
We must do what is right.  
This bill has important consequences for many of us, and more particularly, for our children and our grandchildren. 
Those people who are already retired and at the age of 65 will receive all their benefits. 
For those people who are in the middle and who will soon be retiring, it is not a big problem for them. 
They will have some reduced benefits and some increased costs. 
To those people who have been paying all their lives - that is, all the baby boomers who will begin to turn 50 - they will receive benefits and be faced with another 15 years of increased costs.  
I will tell you for whom this is important. 
I have a daughter who is 24 and a son who is 21. 
Many of you have children and grandchildren. 
The government is asking them to pay 9.9 per cent - I am sure it is 9.9 per cent because the minister wanted the number to be under the figure 10. That represents 10 per cent of their income, and it will increase with inflation. 
The $35,000 that they pay on today will inevitably be more tomorrow.  
As inflation eats away at it and the numbers rise, that number remains the same. 
This goes against everything we have ever done on this program since its inception in 1966. 
It stays the same. 
In 10 or 15 years, that $3,500 will be worth $1,500, $1,000, $500, depending on what government does and what happens to inflation.  
Senator Taylor :
 Honourable senators , it is with great emotion that I am going to speak to you today of a man who was both a colleague and a very dear , Senator Pietro Rizzuto .
 , both friend Senator to Rizzuto very Honourable going it you Pietro of colleague a man I a who and am that speak senators great is emotion a today to . , dear with
 Rizzuto dear friend Honourable of a a senators a , it today , speak you am to is with man Senator . was very who and colleague that great going both Pietro to emotion
 . a man and Honourable colleague Senator speak today a Pietro , Rizzuto it to who , both to very going of was I that am dear great with you emotion is senators friend
I would like his family to know that I am well aware of just how much he accomplished, of his tenacity, and of the courage with which he performed his weighty duties and responsibilities within the Liberal Party of Canada. 
 of I duties with the tenacity well responsibilities his , just of and to he his aware would know the and Canada like accomplished within he of family how weighty much which courage performed am that I . of Liberal his , Party
 the family how Party the of just . his well , which to with of would , am courage I and performed responsibilities tenacity accomplished weighty duties know he he within his of that like aware Canada his Liberal and much of I
 much , tenacity aware he how within performed well of would the like I responsibilities family of courage which of weighty Liberal accomplished the that am and he of and just his duties know his I to his with . Canada Party ,
 well of I . of with responsibilities Liberal accomplished much just aware the performed his I know within family duties how of weighty and am the of Canada which would his tenacity to that like and courage he Party he , , his
 he he I much of accomplished responsibilities and am with family , duties well like performed Liberal which Party tenacity of the , weighty within would of Canada aware his the to know and just his his courage I how of that .
 Liberal I to would his well aware just and he performed within know . of with tenacity of I responsibilities of am accomplished family , , duties Canada how that like of and his he courage the the Party weighty much which his
 much tenacity of like he . Liberal and of just family weighty would responsibilities within his he duties of , performed I know to with accomplished , the am his and well which that his the aware Party I of courage Canada how
 duties . just the of I he accomplished and his of responsibilities am would with the , Liberal Canada weighty how which and he Party aware to tenacity courage his that well his performed know , family of much of I within like
 he courage of within responsibilities the the like performed his family aware Party which that Canada of his how of much and am . his with well accomplished weighty I of to Liberal I tenacity and he just duties , know would ,
 aware responsibilities his to would Canada the which , of just family of I he duties courage and that . like much of within with know tenacity Party his Liberal of and am accomplished performed the well his he how I weighty ,
 , of responsibilities know of family . his of like and that how just he I his Liberal am , his weighty well he duties performed the with to and the tenacity accomplished Canada would which much courage aware I within of Party
 of much tenacity of just to duties accomplished of am responsibilities I know would that family performed I his the weighty like his he his well courage Party . which within , he how the of with Liberal aware Canada and , and
 his of of and his weighty know am would duties with accomplished , of tenacity just of performed the aware family like he within I how , Liberal much which and to Canada . courage responsibilities that his well Party the I he
 I and of that he courage and performed much duties well am which Party how would of I family of of his , aware his like Liberal tenacity responsibilities he know . just the , to his Canada weighty accomplished the with within
 of he weighty the , tenacity to performed . within know his Liberal of his of family and which how well aware the and with like of Party just would I much Canada responsibilities duties he , that courage I am his accomplished
 courage of the to I tenacity I . much am family his he of of and the his well his would he how that which , Canada performed , like of and with Party duties responsibilities know aware accomplished within just Liberal weighty
They are not ready. 
What guidelines will there be for administrators? 
A parliamentary review is therefore vital before their implementation.  
In concluding, I would say to the government that the preferable alternative to its bill would be to simply oblige everyone in the labour force in Canada to invest a percentage of their savings in funds under private management or let government assume its role by providing a safety net for those who could not set aside enough money for their old age.  
Here is an intelligent response to the challenge before us. 
However, and it is regrettable in this era of the welfare state, it seems to me that we prefer to make sweeping rules that apply to everyone in order to resolve the problem of a few.  
Hon. Philippe Deane Gigantès :
You talk with admiration of private investment management. 
How do you explain the disaster at Olympia & York, for example, under the management of Mr. Eyton, our colleague, and the fact that major players like Conrad Black closed Dominion Stores and took the money Dominion Stores employees had invested in a pension fund, a fund they never drew from? 
Are you telling us that the private sector will be more generous and wise than the Caisse de dépôt in Quebec? 
Senator Bolduc :
I did not say disasters did not happen in the private sector. 
Senator Gigantès :
It is not a big deal if you have $3 million, but it is if you lose $35,000 or $70,000 and this is all the money you have. 
It may not be a big deal for you, but it is for small investors.  
Senator Bolduc :
Honourable senators, I never said there would not be any damage in the private sector. 
Some damage is done every day. 
But it is the private sector. 
What you are doing with this bill is giving enormous powers to a few people with money belonging to all Canadians, particularly the poor. 
 I would like his family to know that I am well aware of just how much he accomplished , of his tenacity , and of the courage with which he performed his weighty and responsibilities within the Liberal Party of Canada .
 family am performed accomplished of much which of that with aware Canada of the just Liberal I his responsibilities within like his he duties I his Party weighty . , tenacity , would the how he and know of courage and well
 just with that am how Party he his of , I like would duties aware he Liberal to his of much which know I well tenacity the and the and his accomplished of courage weighty , Canada of . within responsibilities family
 just well he Party how much and the know weighty family of I his , with the of within performed responsibilities Canada to of courage would which . of his his aware and he that like tenacity duties am accomplished Liberal I
Only his family and those who worked closely with him are privy to this information, and I count myself among the latter.  
 information family worked those are to privy and who among his latter with closely myself him . , the and count I Only this
 the information Only latter privy myself worked closely are those with and to I , among his him . this and family who count
 family and are . worked his who the and count this with information among Only those closely privy him myself I latter to ,
 this latter to privy his I . who and are , the information those with family among Only closely and him count worked myself
 privy , those this with the I Only and his . count to information worked myself closely him latter family and among who are
 information and his family to , count are the him I Only worked and myself . privy among this those latter closely who with
 Only to who , among I privy with this the those and latter information worked closely family and his . him are myself count
 I this his myself family are count closely and Only information the with him who privy , and latter to . among those worked
 privy his worked family this . count with those among who myself the , closely Only and and to him latter I are information
 myself this information I and , are Only latter and worked him to the . with closely family among who count those privy his
 this are to those information count myself his closely . him I and privy latter , the family and among worked with Only who
 his and count are who to closely those with the latter and family this , Only . him among privy I information worked myself
 privy and information him worked to with his this among are those family and Only I , closely who count . the myself latter
 the those myself his worked to count who Only and with , privy . latter family closely among are him I this information and
 worked I the with this family Only count are privy to myself among . and closely him latter his and information who , those
 I who with , worked among closely . to and those count this his the family privy Only information myself him are and latter
The Province of Quebec, by its lawfully elected assembly, has requested a resolution amending the Constitution. 
How can I ask them to respect the Constitution if I do not respect the Constitution? 
I respect the Constitution.  
Honourable senators, this is a lawful request done in a lawful way. 
Perhaps certain words are egregious, but it is done in a lawful way, and I am prepared to support them. 
To my mind, the fact that they are prepared to proceed with their reforms before we legislate in any way, shape or form is their business; it is not my business. 
My business is to uphold the Constitution when they request we uphold processes under the Constitution.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
The reform of the school system in Quebec has nothing to do with the Constitution, even less with section 93. 
That was admitted in front of the committee.  
I will give you the answer to my question, and it should trouble all of us. 
The answer is that Quebec wants to be exempted from providing Catholic and Protestant teaching in the public school system. 
It has nothing to do with the linguistic school system, which will be in place - if the calendar is met - before the beginning of the next school year. 
They want to erase religious instruction from the school system, which is imposed on them. 
Narrow as it may be, unfair as it may be, and discriminatory as it may be, it was still renewed in 1982 and given protection from the Charter only 15 years ago. 
That is the reason. 
Do we want to be party to that?  
Do not mix up the reform of the system with the taking away of constitutional, legal rights of two identifiable religious faiths. 
That is what we are being asked to do.  
My personal opinion is that religion should not be in the schools, but that is probably old-fashioned now. 
 Only his family those who worked closely with him are privy to this information , and I count myself among the latter .
 count to family and , him among myself with his latter Only I . the privy closely worked who and those information are
 worked latter among this family privy the I closely him and , to those with Only . count are and information myself who
 worked I the . him who myself to family Only count closely this information latter with are , those his among and and
In 1978 the two of us teamed up for the Liberal Party of Canada's fund-raising campaign. 
 . Party for raising fund s the the two - Canada ' of 1978 us up teamed Liberal In of campaign
 . - us In Canada up the the fund campaign ' raising 1978 Liberal teamed of for of two Party s
 1978 Canada fund - the of raising teamed us two for In up . s campaign ' Party of the Liberal
 s us of Canada 1978 In campaign . of two ' teamed for Party - the the raising up fund Liberal
 In s of the us teamed . for - up Canada ' Liberal campaign of raising the 1978 two Party fund
 . Canada for two teamed the up campaign s - of the In Party us raising Liberal ' fund 1978 of
 two In s up of . us of Party teamed for campaign fund Liberal ' the raising the 1978 - Canada
 us raising of 1978 of Canada ' - s Liberal Party for teamed up the the . In fund two campaign
 the campaign two up In . 1978 us of of Liberal Party s Canada the teamed fund for raising ' -
 the ' teamed 1978 raising us . Party - two fund of of In campaign s for Liberal Canada up the
 campaign the up two In raising 1978 ' Party us fund Liberal of of teamed - for s the . Canada
 of teamed up fund 1978 the - the s ' Liberal two us for raising . of Party campaign Canada In
 us the campaign of Liberal for two the - . 1978 ' teamed up Party of Canada In s raising fund
 ' Liberal s of In for campaign . fund the Canada of Party two - the up us 1978 raising teamed
 up the of 1978 two raising ' Liberal fund . s In teamed the Canada Party of us - for campaign
 two us the raising of In Liberal the s for of 1978 - Party fund . teamed Canada campaign up '
Therefore, the federal requirement that all federal laws must comply with the Charter of Rights and Freedoms was not affected.  
Yesterday, Senator Beaudoin was explaining the different parts of the Constitution, the British North America Act of 1867, the Charter of Rights, and so on. 
At times, it appears the Supreme Court of Canada considers that the Constitution consists only of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 
Despite all the evidence - the stolen truck, the blood on the accused - the judges were only interested in one thing, and that was the arrest warrant. 
There was no warrant because the police acted on the spot when they had the accused, and I think they acted quite properly.  
Honourable senators, the Supreme Court ignored the rights of Mr. Boyle. 
Section 7 of the Charter indicates that Mr. Boyle had the right to life, privacy and security of the person, and those rights were not to be taken from him except by and in accordance with the principles of fundamental justice.  
I think the justices of the Supreme Court of Canada should be sent a message reminding them that the victim also had rights under the Charter.  
In all fairness, honourable senators, I must say that three of the justices dissented with the majority decision. 
They felt the police action had no bearing or outcome on the decision. 
The chief justice came down the middle and quoted the decision made by former chief justice Brian Dickson, which I understand finds that, if the subject is not spelled out in the Constitution, it is implied as being there. 
However, there again, that is merely my interpretation.  
I emphasize again that Mr. Boyle had the right to his life. 
He had the right to have a vehicle and operate it, and he had the right to have money in his possession. 
All those were taken away from him, and all the Supreme Court of Canada could think of was that piece of paper called a "warrant" and to criticize the police for not having such a document.  
I wanted to suggest that perhaps criminals should apply for a warrant before they commit murder, but I do not want to pursue that because I am afraid that some Charter judge will give them a warrant or a licence to do so. 
Fifteen years ago, I would have been shocked at criticism of a decision rendered by the Supreme Court; but, today that is commonplace. 
When a major decision comes down from the Supreme Court, the media is there to interview people who wish to comment, mostly negatively, on the decision. 
As I stated, we would not have seen a headline like that 15 years ago.  
That is their function, and Parliament has referred it to them. 
 In 1978 the two of us teamed for the Liberal Party of Canada ' s fund - raising campaign .
 us - the Canada of the Party campaign raising fund In Liberal s 1978 . ' of up teamed two
 campaign two In Canada raising ' fund Party - teamed the . s us for the up 1978 Liberal of
 1978 In for of of two s . fund teamed the up Canada the Liberal raising Party ' - campaign
Under the direction of Senator Dalia Wood, Senator Rizzuto and I worked all out to get 67 out of 75 members elected in Quebec in the 1979 federal election on May 22. 
 and on elected all the members in of of out Rizzuto 1979 direction Dalia the Quebec election out I in worked Senator get May to . Under 67 federal 75 , Senator Wood 22
 Rizzuto I all in in direction Senator to May 1979 on 22 Wood Dalia out . elected the get worked the election Senator , of Quebec members and federal 67 Under out 75 of
 on election 75 Wood 22 out Quebec all . 67 members of worked to Senator May , federal out Rizzuto get Senator 1979 in elected I Under of the and direction the in Dalia
 elected out election in Wood to 22 67 Quebec worked and members 1979 of 75 . Senator the the on get May Under federal out all direction of Rizzuto Senator in I Dalia ,
 election the , elected out of I Quebec Dalia federal the worked Senator on 1979 out Under and 75 all Rizzuto direction in in 67 Wood of to . get members May Senator 22
 the of 22 worked May get Wood elected Senator out 67 Senator out 1979 all , to federal I Rizzuto on Dalia members direction election Quebec of in . 75 Under the and in
 out direction Senator on federal Quebec the elected I Under members 67 election in worked and of 75 22 to Wood out Senator . Dalia get in , May Rizzuto all the of 1979
 of the May 75 in . get Wood in to out election the worked Senator Quebec 22 direction , out members federal Rizzuto I Senator Under Dalia elected 67 of all on 1979 and
 the members all direction election the Rizzuto 75 Senator on of elected Under out Senator out 67 in I get Dalia of worked , in and Quebec Wood . 22 1979 to May federal
 and 67 75 out the 22 out 1979 elected direction federal of Quebec the Under . May election in all worked in Rizzuto Senator I Wood , on of get to members Dalia Senator
 Under 1979 I Rizzuto of . on get 22 May Dalia of Senator 67 the members 75 all worked in federal and out election Senator Wood Quebec to direction elected in out the ,
 members election federal I , to out May Rizzuto 1979 Senator 75 elected worked Senator and Wood the in Quebec out Under the of all direction 67 Dalia on of get . 22 in
 federal Senator election May all in I the to Rizzuto of Quebec members out on 67 elected get Under Senator 75 direction and of out the Wood in 22 . 1979 worked , Dalia
 75 federal Under elected the Dalia direction 1979 Rizzuto the out in Quebec 22 of Senator , . on 67 election members to get of I and in out all worked Wood Senator May
 election Dalia Senator the , Wood direction in worked of of Under 67 75 . in 22 out the out Quebec 1979 members all on to get federal elected May and Rizzuto I Senator
 May in on elected Senator 75 members the election all . of the 22 out of Rizzuto Wood 1979 67 Dalia , worked direction Senator and to out get Under federal I Quebec in
Canada Cooperatives Bill 
First Reading 
The Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C-5, respecting cooperatives.  
Bill read first time.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
When shall this bill be read the second time?  
On motion of Senator Carstairs, bill placed on Orders of the Day for second reading on Thursday next, December 11, 1997.  
Bill to Amend-Second Reading-Motions in Amendment-Debate Adjourned to Await Ruling of Speaker 
On the Order: 
Resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Moore, seconded by the Honourable Senator Ferretti Barth, for the second reading of Bill C-16, An Act to amend the Criminal Code and the interpretation Act (powers to arrest and enter dwellings), 
And on the motion in amendment of the Honourable Senator Cools, seconded by the Honourable Senator Sparrow, that the motion be amended by deleting all the words after "That" and substituting the following therefor: 
"Bill C-16, An Act to amend the Criminal Code and the Interpretation Act (powers to arrest and enter dwellings), be not now read a second time because 
( a ) the Senate is opposed to the principle of a bill which has been placed before Parliament as a result of the judgment of the Supreme Court of Canada of May 22, 1997, and of the Court's Orders of June 27 and November 19, 1997; 
( b ) the Senate finds it repugnant that the Supreme Court is infringing on the sovereign rights of Parliament to enact legislation and is failing to respect the constitutional comity between the courts and Parliament; and 
( c ) the Court is in effect coercing Parliament by threatening chaotic consequences respecting law enforcement and arrests if Parliament does not pass this bill."  
Hon. Orville H. Phillips :
Honourable senators, I had adjourned the debate but I understand Senator Wood wishes to speak.  
Hon. Dalia Wood :
Honourable senators, I rise to speak in support of Senator Cools's amendment. 
The amendment, described as a reasoned amendment, is a parliamentary device which allows a member to raise concerns and opposition to the principles of a bill. 
 Under the direction of Senator Dalia Wood , Senator Rizzuto and I worked all out to get 67 out of 75 members elected in Quebec in the 1979 election on May 22 .
 get Quebec . 75 elected the election to of Wood 22 direction Senator on Dalia in the Rizzuto of worked federal Senator 67 , members 1979 out Under May I and in all
 . 75 May election on Senator to Senator federal members get Wood of 22 all the out I , Under in worked and Dalia 67 of direction in Quebec out 1979 Rizzuto the
 in in members elected of I on federal the 1979 direction . out worked 75 Under and get to of all out election Quebec Senator Rizzuto the May Dalia Senator Wood 22 67
It was then that Senator Rizzuto brilliantly combined responsibilities and achievements. 
 Senator Rizzuto brilliantly that It responsibilities was and combined . then achievements
 responsibilities It and achievements then Senator brilliantly that was Rizzuto . combined
 brilliantly . achievements It combined Senator was and Rizzuto responsibilities that then
 then combined . was Senator brilliantly and It achievements responsibilities Rizzuto that
 was then responsibilities achievements . Rizzuto that Senator It combined brilliantly and
 brilliantly It . and that achievements Rizzuto responsibilities combined then was Senator
 combined was that then brilliantly responsibilities and It . Senator Rizzuto achievements
 combined achievements that and It then . was brilliantly Rizzuto Senator responsibilities
 then responsibilities . was combined It achievements and that Rizzuto Senator brilliantly
 . It brilliantly that Senator was combined Rizzuto achievements and responsibilities then
 combined It Rizzuto . was achievements and responsibilities that then brilliantly Senator
 achievements combined Rizzuto then brilliantly . responsibilities that was It Senator and
 . Rizzuto combined Senator was and brilliantly responsibilities then It that achievements
 . that brilliantly was then responsibilities combined Rizzuto and It Senator achievements
 Senator Rizzuto It brilliantly achievements . and responsibilities combined then was that
 responsibilities combined and . brilliantly It then was that Senator Rizzuto achievements
What linkage is there between the new school system in Quebec and the request to exempt Quebec from certain obligations of section 93? 
I do not see any.  
Senator Grafstein :
Honourable senators, there is constitutional law. 
Quebec wants to proceed by the rule of law. 
They are seeking to renovate their system under the rule of law and the Constitution.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
That is not my question.  
Senator Grafstein :
I assume that if they choose to proceed, they can. 
However, why should we in the Senate allow any province to proceed in a way that we consider unlawful? 
If there is an amendment to the Constitution, each senator in his or her heart and mind, after reviewing the testimony, must come to a conclusion. 
He or she can either vote for, against or abstain from the vote on the resolution.  
They want to be under the law, as does the Province of Newfoundland. 
They want to be under the Constitution. 
If they meet the standards of a constitutional change, I, for one, will support them, notwithstanding the fact that I mistrust their motivation and mistrust what they say. 
However, on matter of dealing with the rule of law, I am bound by the rule of law.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
My question has nothing to do with that answer. 
It was renewed in 1982 and given protection from the Charter. 
 It was then that Senator Rizzuto combined responsibilities and achievements .
 was . Rizzuto that Senator It and combined brilliantly achievements responsibilities
 was Senator that achievements then Rizzuto brilliantly . It responsibilities combined
 then and was responsibilities that . combined achievements brilliantly Rizzuto It
On December 14, 1979, a general election was called. 
 , election 14 . December 1979 , general a On called was
 a election was called , December 14 , 1979 . general On
 14 election On , general a . , was called 1979 December
 , general a election . was On , December called 1979 14
 . general election On 1979 14 , was called a , December
 election called 1979 14 a . general December , On was ,
 , 14 1979 a was . On December election , called general
 was a December . general 14 election On called 1979 , ,
 . was election , On called , December 14 general 1979 a
 On December general called , 14 election , . 1979 was a
 14 called 1979 , On general . was election December a ,
 . 1979 December 14 election , general a , On called was
 1979 general , called 14 . , December was On a election
 called was general election a , 14 1979 On December , .
 14 called On election general was . 1979 a , December ,
 1979 was , . called 14 On a , general December election
The Auditor General should have free access not only to the fund but also to the board itself, lifting the limits on RRSP contributions so that people can have an opportunity to look after themselves, and removing the foreign investment restrictions on RRSP investments.  
Honourable senators, there are elements of truth in all things nefarious. 
That is why we call it propaganda. 
The government is an accomplished practitioner in this art of propaganda, with their plea to save the CPP and their prediction of dire consequences if action is not taken today, this minute. 
They made only token consultations. 
Invoking closure on the debate on Bill C-2 was the first indication of the government's intention. 
Now we are being told in the Senate by the government that it is important to act now because the Minister of Finance has an agreement with the provinces.  
The government's usual modus operandi is diversion, mixed with a little fabrication. 
It was convenient to have the diversion of a postal strike with its ensuing back-to-work legislation before the house while Bill C-2 was being introduced in the other place and closure was being imposed. 
It was also convenient for the government to falsely accuse the former prime minister of criminal intent and behaviour after its incompetence was fully exposed to the Canadian public following the Quebec referendum.  
It is not a question of means justifying the end. 
In this bill, the means and the end are equally wrong.  
Time allocation has been imposed seven times on other bills, most recently on third reading of Bill C-22, the Pearson airport bill. 
It was imposed on Bill C-110 which proposed certain constitutional amendments; on Bill C-12 which dealt with employment insurance; and on the committee report on Term 17. 
It is becoming a habit; a habit that is hard to break.  
Bill C-2 is just another in a series of bad bills, incompetent work and dictatorial action. 
It was introduced last week in the Senate, preceded by time allocation in the other place. 
With passage of this bill, the government will be imposing the largest tax grab in the history of the country. 
Canadians are unaware of what is happening, in particular our young people who will be the most affected and the most mistreated. 
We owe it to them, our grandchildren and our children, to study this legislation thoroughly and to amend it, because it is not their fault that this program has been so badly managed. 
 On December 14 , 1979 , general election was called .
 a , general election . 1979 called 14 was December On
 , a 1979 14 . December called election general was ,
 , general election was a 14 December . called On ,
On February 18, 1980, Senator Rizzuto and I contributed to a resounding victory: 74 Liberals elected out of 75.  
 74 On of and resounding 18 75 1980 I victory : out . to elected Senator , Liberals contributed , a Rizzuto February
 Rizzuto On and out 74 Liberals . resounding I Senator 75 , of to victory a February : elected 18 1980 contributed ,
 , 74 contributed a and February , victory of . elected Rizzuto 75 to I 18 On 1980 resounding Senator : Liberals out
 . 18 , Senator out , contributed 74 1980 resounding and 75 of a February elected : Liberals to Rizzuto I victory On
 Liberals 1980 victory . : 18 a Rizzuto , to 75 and elected , of 74 Senator out contributed resounding I On February
 : I 74 elected a Liberals , to of Senator 18 75 1980 . victory and out February Rizzuto resounding On , contributed
 contributed . 75 victory Liberals 1980 , resounding out of I 18 Rizzuto to elected and On February a : Senator , 74
 : elected 18 to of Senator . Liberals resounding , 74 , out a Rizzuto and February I On victory 75 1980 contributed
 of resounding On 18 , contributed I and a . victory Rizzuto Senator : 75 elected February 74 , to Liberals 1980 out
 . resounding Rizzuto elected February out a 1980 74 75 of Senator , Liberals 18 victory contributed : , On to and I
 On and Liberals : . resounding 1980 75 , a February 18 Senator out contributed Rizzuto of , I elected to 74 victory
 1980 victory contributed Liberals 18 I out February On resounding : , a to Rizzuto 74 75 . Senator , elected and of
 contributed elected Senator out 18 Rizzuto , resounding 75 to and . February victory : 1980 of On 74 Liberals a , I
 1980 , , I Liberals On 18 . elected to February resounding a contributed 75 Rizzuto : victory Senator of out and 74
 I , Rizzuto and Liberals . On to a , : contributed elected victory of 1980 out 74 75 Senator February resounding 18
 out 75 victory , , contributed to 74 1980 I Rizzuto : elected On . 18 Senator Liberals resounding of February a and
When you put all of that together, over time, Canadians, and particularly our youth, will say that enough is enough. 
You cannot have high EI premiums or high taxation through high EI premiums to pay your deficit down; then jack up your rates on the Canada Pension Plan; and then modify the OAS and GIS such that people receive reduced payouts, because you are hitting the same generation. 
You have bought off the seniors, and you are hitting the kids. 
They will not forget that.  
On October 30, Senator Tkachuk asked the following: 
Why is the government trying to fix the CPP by hitting hardest those least able to afford it?...  
Could the Leader of the Government in the Senate prevail upon his colleague the Minister of Finance to have his officials produce information showing the impact of the freeze in the earnings exemption for different ranges of income?  
For example, could data be prepared showing how much the freeze will benefit the government from those earning income below the poverty line relative to their family income, and how much it will save those with incomes above the poverty line relative to their total income?  
In other words, it is and will be perceived as another tax.  
On November 5, Senator Oliver said: 
They are increasing it by one month per year to give people time to adjust to the new reality of that retirement age. 
In effect, that will keep things in relative control.  
It should have been explained to Canadians that the government explored that method and rejected it for specific reasons. 
As others have said before me, people are living longer. 
While the age of 65 was formerly not achieved by many, it is being achieved by most today. 
That should be taken into consideration as a basis for increasing the age for retirement because it will decrease the burden on the young people who today believe that they will have to pay the whole shot for us.  
Senator Oliver continued: 
Honourable senators, in these times of slowing real incomes, increasing long-term interest rates, high personal taxes, increased CPP premiums, and ridiculously high EI premiums, where does the Leader of the Government believe that Canadians, who will receive less money from public plans, will find money to put away in their RRSPs to secure their own retirements?  
On November 6, Senator Oliver asked: 
Honourable senators, in 1995, the Department of Finance conducted a study on the impact of the increase in CPP premiums between 1986 and 1995. 
 On February , 1980 , Senator Rizzuto and I contributed to a resounding victory : 74 Liberals elected out of 75 .
 of , elected On contributed Liberals 18 1980 February : , 74 Senator to out Rizzuto a resounding . victory 75 I
 a elected of contributed out I , Liberals 18 . 74 : to victory 75 and resounding Senator , February 1980 On
 Rizzuto I On Senator 74 contributed . , 18 elected and : out Liberals resounding of victory February to 75 a ,
In May 1980, we were in the full swing of Quebec's referendum on sovereignty-association. 
 In referendum , . association 1980 full May ' of the were we sovereignty swing - Quebec s on in
 , association the sovereignty . s we ' - of on 1980 full referendum Quebec swing in were In May
 swing we s in of 1980 ' the full . association , May were referendum sovereignty on - Quebec In
 association the of ' In s - full were , sovereignty . in 1980 swing Quebec on May we referendum
 Quebec swing referendum 1980 we the in In . association May on - ' full s were , of sovereignty
 May referendum 1980 of association swing - sovereignty In s full Quebec in the were ' on . we ,
 sovereignty full the were May referendum In - 1980 on of we association swing s Quebec , . ' in
 May on full in swing the ' In were referendum , s Quebec of sovereignty we association . - 1980
 Quebec May - we , of in association full s were sovereignty the . referendum 1980 In on ' swing
 - were 1980 of . association in sovereignty ' swing we full , referendum May s Quebec In the on
 of association - we full s 1980 in referendum . sovereignty ' , In were swing on Quebec May the
 in association . referendum Quebec s of sovereignty In , we on 1980 ' swing were full the - May
 ' - swing the were in we , sovereignty association In . 1980 on of Quebec May full referendum s
 , of we - . were sovereignty May Quebec In association 1980 swing in ' full the referendum on s
 , swing Quebec In - . the on sovereignty May of full ' association referendum in 1980 were s we
 ' the Quebec association , - sovereignty May In swing of s we were referendum . on full 1980 in
As senators, we are unlike any other evidence-gathering body. 
We gather evidence, we serve as our own advisors, seek our own counsel, we become judges, and we become the jury. 
We are the supreme court of the land when it comes to legislation. 
We must view the evidence before committees with care. 
I urge all senators, before they vote, to carefully review the full transcript of the evidence.  
Let me say at the outset that I was very sceptical, particularly after having read the Quebec resolution which was adopted unanimously in the Quebec Assembly, save for two abstentions, and which was quickly passed by the Quebec assembly requesting the federal government amend section 93 of the Constitution by deleting the subsections in so far as their application pertains to Quebec. 
These sections were incorporated in the British North American Act, 1867. 
The Quebec resolution in its fourth recital gave the Quebec assembly's opinion that the proposed amendment to section 93 requested in no way constituted recognition by the Quebec assembly of the Constitution Act, 1982, which was adopted without its consent.  
Honourable senators, noticing as you must that I am and remain a staunch supporter of the Constitution Act, 1982, this caused me great personal grief and concern.  
The first hurdle I had to overcome was whether or not the wording of the Quebec resolution on its face was so invidious, so egregious and so inconsistent that the recital made it inoperable and, in the process, would defeat its own request to amend the 1867 provisions by the mechanisms of the 1982 Constitution.  
I asked myself how the Province of Quebec could be asking for an amendment to the Constitution contained in the 1867 British North America Act, which was now part of the 1982 Constitution, while recognizing that the only methodology available to Parliament would be via the Constitution Act, 1982.  
Section 43 of the 1982 Constitution contains bilateral amendment processes between the federal government and provinces where their interests are solely engaged. 
Clearly, the only highway, the only path the Government of Quebec or the assembly of Quebec could take to achieve its objective was via the 1982 Constitution.  
Honourable senators, I then examined the federal resolution, which is the one we are being asked to consider. 
The federal resolution differs substantially from the Quebec resolutions. 
They are both appended to the report for your consideration.  
The federal resolution made reference not only to the 1982 Constitution, but to section 23 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedom incorporated in the Constitution Act, 1982.  
I concluded, after listening carefully to legal advice proffered before the committee, that the operative clause of any constitutional resolution was the wording of the amending clause itself. 
While recitals are of interest, while they are opinionated, while they are descriptive, they are not binding.  
Again, it was clear to me that the only way that the federal government could accede to the Quebec assembly's request was by utilizing the 1982 Constitution. 
 In May 1980 , were in the full swing of Quebec ' s referendum on sovereignty - association .
 association 1980 ' we sovereignty s full . swing - May on , Quebec In were the referendum of
 Quebec s 1980 referendum , association sovereignty swing we In - were in . the of ' full on
 ' in , 1980 May full the - Quebec referendum In sovereignty we on association were s of .
This umbrella committee, drawn from all provincial and federal parties, and created and represented for the referendum period by the provincial opposition leader, Claude Ryan, intervened. 
 referendum parties , period umbrella opposition and the . , This committee provincial the drawn represented leader and Claude created Ryan from , all federal intervened for provincial by , and
 federal and provincial represented for drawn from period , the committee opposition . provincial intervened , the , parties and all leader Claude created , Ryan This and by referendum umbrella
 , provincial committee the federal leader created Claude Ryan referendum period parties intervened This provincial , from , for , and drawn opposition and and all by represented umbrella . the
 . federal by , Claude leader created and the drawn , committee period Ryan referendum for represented opposition , provincial and and This the from provincial parties intervened all , umbrella
 federal This by committee all , , . provincial and the period represented for opposition the from intervened , Claude Ryan and parties provincial and referendum leader created umbrella , drawn
 Claude umbrella from federal and , provincial created all . , and period intervened committee referendum by provincial drawn parties This the Ryan and represented the , for , opposition leader
 and federal for opposition , created Claude represented committee referendum all . and by , , umbrella the parties , This the from provincial drawn and provincial period intervened Ryan leader
 represented This referendum , , . created and committee all the parties the from Claude leader , federal drawn umbrella period provincial for and , Ryan opposition provincial intervened by and
 opposition all and for and provincial committee intervened period leader , , by from and . This the created drawn the Ryan , provincial , referendum umbrella Claude represented federal parties
 umbrella provincial parties , , for drawn opposition and , Claude referendum . intervened from and the committee federal Ryan by all created the This provincial and leader period represented ,
 leader and and for drawn the provincial , referendum parties , . , , provincial the committee represented period intervened umbrella all from This and opposition Claude federal Ryan by created
 provincial , the intervened leader umbrella all the Ryan federal , drawn created , opposition provincial and and parties referendum Claude for committee . represented and period This from by ,
 created from by and committee , federal , parties drawn for , provincial This Claude represented provincial and period Ryan all the leader the referendum and opposition . umbrella , intervened
 , provincial This by . , for , referendum leader period Claude committee drawn the created and , intervened federal opposition represented from and parties all provincial and the umbrella Ryan
 and referendum , leader federal Claude by represented intervened created all the Ryan from committee parties period the and opposition . umbrella and drawn , , , provincial provincial for This
 all Ryan , from drawn and federal the and period parties leader created umbrella referendum provincial and opposition the by , provincial for Claude . This , intervened represented committee ,
Students will continue to take religion courses or to receive pastoral animation or religious care and guidance services if they so desire.  
Before the end of the third year after the linguistic school boards are in place, the schools will be asked to consult the parents and decide whether or not they wish to maintain their confessional status.  
Those unfamiliar with Catholic and Protestant school boards in Montreal and Quebec City should know that in many cases, particularly in the Protestant system, it is the language of instruction which predominates. 
Many schools have little, if any, religious content, while in others it is very strong. 
Parents already have a say in how much religion they want their children exposed to and that will continue under the new system.  
While section 93 guarantees are only a matter of religious denominations, the essential characteristics of the resulting Quebec school system have, nonetheless, been linguistic. 
One does not speak often of going to a Catholic or Protestant school any more. 
One usually speaks of going to a French or an English school. 
It was inevitable, then, that the committee would be drawn into a debate on how the amendment of section 93 might affect linguistic rights, particularly those claimed by the minority.  
While section 23 of the Charter establishes minority linguistic education rights, Quebec is not bound by all its provisions and so has adopted legislation in this field which, in effect, creates two classes of English-speaking Quebecers as it distinguishes between those educated in Canada and those educated elsewhere. 
Only those parents educated in English in Canada can pass on the benefit of minority English language education to their children. 
Those Quebec parents who were educated in English outside of Canada must have their children educated in French. 
We have in Quebec two classes of English-speaking Quebecers.  
Quebec has been repeatedly criticized for this discrimination, and rightly so. 
How this undesirable situation developed can be traced to the then Minister of Justice, who is Prime Minister today.  
I will quote from his book, Straight from the Heart , where Mr. Chrétien describes how he was responsible for exempting Quebec from the crucial parts of section 23. 
He says: 
During the weeks that followed, I continued to try to overcome Quebec's objections, to the extent of modifying the principle of minority language education and agreeing to fiscal compensation when Quebec opted out of amendments that affected culture and education. 
That required a hell of a lot of selling to Trudeau, but he went along in the end, as did the nine other premiers, who were willing to reopen their sealed bargain in order to bring in Quebec. 
Mr. Chrétien goes on to say: 
 This umbrella committee , drawn from all provincial and federal parties , and created and for the referendum period by the provincial opposition leader , Claude Ryan , intervened .
 Ryan created all the by Claude and and from , committee . parties provincial provincial for intervened opposition umbrella and period This the leader , drawn , represented referendum ,
 created parties , all provincial and period This the . by committee represented federal referendum Ryan the umbrella drawn and , provincial , opposition Claude , intervened leader from and
 referendum intervened and , the This . and , parties , leader and federal umbrella for represented by period from Ryan drawn committee , Claude provincial opposition provincial the created
As general manager of the Liberal Party of Canada, Quebec section, I asked the Honourable Jean Chrétien, Minister of Justice and co-chair of the umbrella committee, if Senator Rizzuto could join me. 
 of Chrétien Canada if the the Justice Liberal chair asked , of . - , and of Senator Quebec join section co Minister Honourable the I of manager As Party could me Jean umbrella committee Rizzuto , general ,
 umbrella Jean , the the of I Justice - if , , of of committee section Party Honourable Quebec Senator Minister Canada join manager of general asked Chrétien and As could me . co Rizzuto the chair , Liberal
 section Liberal , of , committee umbrella the join the of Senator - Minister I Justice , Canada Honourable of , asked Quebec . could if co general As me the Chrétien of manager Party Rizzuto and Jean chair
 manager of Party chair - of Chrétien could , Honourable , the Jean As Liberal the , general Quebec , me the Senator if . co Canada asked Justice committee umbrella Rizzuto Minister section of and of I join
 Senator , As . asked Jean co committee general me Rizzuto of if section and , , the - Party of the chair manager could Canada umbrella Chrétien of Quebec join Justice Minister the of I , Honourable Liberal
 I Quebec and , committee Minister . the Rizzuto , , if the chair Party Canada the general of , section Honourable Senator of Jean Liberal of join asked - could manager As Justice umbrella Chrétien co of me
 asked the chair of and section committee manager Liberal As me Quebec general Canada of Rizzuto I Honourable of Minister Jean Party , of - Justice the could Senator co umbrella . the , , join if , Chrétien
 co Jean of Minister , of Liberal the Honourable Quebec Canada Rizzuto I manager could As - and chair the . committee Chrétien the , me join , section Justice Party asked general of of , umbrella Senator if
 Chrétien Justice asked Rizzuto chair , - , the committee general of . and Quebec me Canada Honourable of umbrella Liberal if , the I Party section Minister As , Jean the Senator of could of co join manager
 , Quebec of chair me the asked Canada Minister committee the if could of , join Senator co Honourable and of As , - Rizzuto Chrétien , the Party section Jean umbrella manager . of Justice general Liberal I
 Canada manager of , Rizzuto Party , Justice of As join asked Chrétien could co and chair Jean , Minister - I , me if section the of committee Honourable umbrella the the of Senator general . Liberal Quebec
 Justice I , co if chair me Liberal join umbrella Honourable section Minister Chrétien of Canada Senator Quebec of the the asked of Jean , of could committee . the As Party , - and manager Rizzuto general ,
 Minister , Canada , Quebec , the me I of of Liberal section of Jean manager , umbrella and general the - could Chrétien committee Rizzuto chair Party co Senator the join Justice if Honourable of asked . As
 - , co Quebec could Honourable As join of the section and Party committee the Minister chair of manager Canada asked me . Jean general the , I , , Chrétien of Liberal Justice if umbrella of Senator Rizzuto
 , , me Jean Liberal the asked if Chrétien As chair Party of Quebec the general of of I , Canada Minister Justice manager co Rizzuto of the committee section join could umbrella Senator and , - . Honourable
 chair the Chrétien Justice could , Liberal Quebec Senator section of asked Party I of co committee umbrella of As and if general the me Canada , , Jean , . join - manager the of Rizzuto Minister Honourable
They are not ready. 
What guidelines will there be for administrators? 
A parliamentary review is therefore vital before their implementation.  
In concluding, I would say to the government that the preferable alternative to its bill would be to simply oblige everyone in the labour force in Canada to invest a percentage of their savings in funds under private management or let government assume its role by providing a safety net for those who could not set aside enough money for their old age.  
Here is an intelligent response to the challenge before us. 
However, and it is regrettable in this era of the welfare state, it seems to me that we prefer to make sweeping rules that apply to everyone in order to resolve the problem of a few.  
Hon. Philippe Deane Gigantès :
You talk with admiration of private investment management. 
How do you explain the disaster at Olympia & York, for example, under the management of Mr. Eyton, our colleague, and the fact that major players like Conrad Black closed Dominion Stores and took the money Dominion Stores employees had invested in a pension fund, a fund they never drew from? 
Are you telling us that the private sector will be more generous and wise than the Caisse de dépôt in Quebec? 
Senator Bolduc :
I did not say disasters did not happen in the private sector. 
Senator Gigantès :
It is not a big deal if you have $3 million, but it is if you lose $35,000 or $70,000 and this is all the money you have. 
It may not be a big deal for you, but it is for small investors.  
Senator Bolduc :
Honourable senators, I never said there would not be any damage in the private sector. 
Some damage is done every day. 
But it is the private sector. 
What you are doing with this bill is giving enormous powers to a few people with money belonging to all Canadians, particularly the poor. 
 As general manager of the Liberal Party of Canada , Quebec section , I asked the Honourable Jean Chrétien , Minister of Justice and co - chair of the umbrella committee , if Senator Rizzuto could me .
 , the of , Chrétien Canada Senator I . and umbrella asked of , if of of Minister Justice manager me As section join the could committee Rizzuto , Liberal Jean Party the Honourable general Quebec - co
 section join , . Senator Honourable Quebec umbrella Canada the As of Rizzuto chair and co asked Justice manager if of Minister the me , the committee of , general could , Chrétien - I Jean of Party
 chair of of , I and Minister the Canada - manager . Honourable general umbrella Rizzuto section co , could asked Quebec me Party Chrétien As , the of Justice of Jean , join committee the Senator if
The Senator accepted enthusiastically and made an outstanding contribution.  
 and The . contribution accepted outstanding Senator made an enthusiastically
 The enthusiastically accepted outstanding Senator and contribution . an made
 contribution made outstanding . Senator and accepted an The enthusiastically
 . an Senator made outstanding and contribution accepted The enthusiastically
 outstanding an made . The and enthusiastically accepted Senator contribution
 . outstanding made contribution and accepted Senator an The enthusiastically
 accepted outstanding enthusiastically Senator The an and made contribution .
 accepted outstanding contribution . made The and an enthusiastically Senator
 and Senator The contribution . outstanding enthusiastically made accepted an
 . contribution Senator The accepted enthusiastically made and outstanding an
 and outstanding enthusiastically an The accepted . Senator contribution made
 an and Senator outstanding . accepted made The contribution enthusiastically
 The made enthusiastically contribution . outstanding Senator an accepted and
 The outstanding Senator made . contribution an accepted enthusiastically and
 accepted enthusiastically and made outstanding . an Senator contribution The
 accepted contribution . outstanding Senator an enthusiastically and made The
Will you agree with me that we invite the minister to attend and debate that and other questions?  
Senator Grafstein :
Honourable senators, I am trying to follow practice and procedure in the Senate. 
I am addressing the report of the special joint committee. 
For me, the question is elucidation for honourable senators to consider that report. 
To me, the evidence and the outcome are clear. 
There may be evidence in other places, and there may be views held by other people, but I had the evidence before the committee. 
I would not say it was totally unequivocal, but it was clear enough to satisfy me that there was a high enough hurdle having been passed to support the federal resolution. 
That is what I have said in my speech. 
Read the evidence. 
Read the transcript. 
It is clear.  
Senator Bolduc :
Honourable senators, I have listened to your arguments attentively. 
You have argued your case like good lawyers. 
There is no doubt about that. 
What you said basically is that it is up to Quebec to address its education problem and decide whether there will be guarantees of denominational education in the schools. 
You say it is a provincial problem. 
In my speech, I have said that there is no guarantee whatsoever that that is what will happen. 
But the right to dissentience that was guaranteed under section 93 of the Constitution will no longer be protected. 
 The Senator accepted enthusiastically and an outstanding contribution .
 . and made an accepted outstanding enthusiastically The contribution
 Senator and made The . contribution enthusiastically accepted an
 The and made Senator contribution . enthusiastically an outstanding
Those of us on the executive of the umbrella committee had our work cut out for us. 
 work of the for of out had cut executive us the umbrella Those us our committee . on
 of our Those of committee the . us us on out work the had cut executive umbrella for
 of . work of the our umbrella had Those on out for committee cut the executive us us
 umbrella our executive Those us on work the the committee had of out cut us . for of
 on . Those cut our us out for had executive umbrella committee us the of work of the
 the . umbrella committee of executive on cut Those out for our work us of us had the
 the for our us executive cut . committee on work umbrella Those had of of the out us
 us committee of the cut our for work . of us Those out umbrella had the executive on
 out of cut our us committee for the on . executive us had the work Those umbrella of
 umbrella out . on us had executive cut Those us the work our of committee for the of
 the out on our us for cut umbrella Those of work executive of had committee us . the
 of executive . the had committee cut us umbrella of for Those the work out our on us
 out us the cut umbrella of our had the Those committee us executive work for on . of
 our us had umbrella the work of out for of Those committee . cut executive the us on
 of . us the cut for on committee our work Those had out executive us the of umbrella
 cut us of out umbrella on . committee Those our us executive had the work of the for
However, past experience suggests that, notwithstanding the fact that we do meet on Wednesdays at 1:30 p.m., we often sit well beyond three o'clock. 
On one occasion we had witnesses waiting for upwards of an hour.  
Senator Kinsella :
Thank you, Senator Stewart.  
Perhaps I might address the Deputy Leader of the Government, then. 
By way of recapitulation, this issue is important for all honourable senators. 
A request for leave has been made by the Chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee to allow that committee to sit tomorrow, Wednesday, even though the Senate may then be sitting. 
The issue is that Wednesday, in our common understanding, was to be a short day to allow committees to sit on Wednesday afternoons.  
Not just today but at other times, Senator Stewart has brought to our attention the fact that committees operate on that assumption and arrange their business plans, only to be frustrated in executing their business plan by the Senate going way beyond 3:00 or 3:30 p.m. on Wednesday afternoons.  
Senator Stewart has explained to us that that is the main concern. 
He would like some assurance from the leadership on both sides that, on Wednesdays, we would try harder to respect that tradition. 
We on this side agree to make every effort to complete our work on Wednesday afternoons at around 3:00 or 3:15 p.m. If you can also agree, perhaps we do not need to have this motion.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, is leave granted?  
Senator Kinsella :
It depends upon the answer.  
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, we must make an effort to allow committees to sit. 
They do invite witnesses, many of whom come from out of town. 
We inconvenience them if we are not able to hear from them.  
 Those of us on the executive of umbrella committee had our work cut out for us .
 our cut committee Those . of for us executive the out on had us umbrella work the
 on of work for us the . of committee our Those the executive umbrella out cut us
 umbrella committee us of our out Those work the cut on the us . had for executive
Helped along by Senator Rizzuto's diplomacy, determination and belief in what he was doing, the committee was able to surmount the greatest challenges.  
 , greatest , to surmount determination the in s Senator was belief diplomacy ' what by . doing committee able was Rizzuto challenges along he the Helped and
 determination he what ' surmount diplomacy challenges . by was to and Senator able was Rizzuto in doing Helped along s the greatest , belief the , committee
 what Helped ' greatest . was was , committee belief challenges diplomacy by along able determination Senator Rizzuto doing in to he , surmount and the the s
 in Senator to committee was , Rizzuto determination he by diplomacy . s along surmount the Helped ' what challenges able the was greatest , and belief doing
 was , , in what . able ' to surmount challenges by the the and s greatest Senator Rizzuto he committee belief determination doing diplomacy was Helped along
 to ' by Rizzuto , surmount diplomacy belief the , determination what was was committee and able the Senator . Helped along greatest doing s challenges he in
 along greatest was ' able in diplomacy Senator belief the challenges , Rizzuto was to committee Helped what and doing by the he s determination surmount , .
 greatest and was Helped Rizzuto he was doing able what in the along , surmount Senator committee the to determination challenges by . ' belief diplomacy s ,
 , surmount Senator was in , committee s was greatest challenges determination what to . the the along diplomacy belief ' he Helped able and doing by Rizzuto
 Rizzuto was surmount Senator by ' , was the belief and , doing determination to diplomacy greatest in along s able challenges he committee . the what Helped
 s what , Helped the was by in Senator was surmount he determination the committee , able diplomacy doing greatest ' to challenges along . Rizzuto and belief
 was what Rizzuto able . and in ' belief the was to doing Senator along diplomacy determination surmount , challenges he greatest Helped by committee s the ,
 , along . to determination the and s he the committee surmount challenges Helped what in was Senator doing able belief was by diplomacy , ' greatest Rizzuto
 surmount greatest to the belief Senator was he in along challenges ' able Helped , Rizzuto committee diplomacy and doing s determination the . by what was ,
 Senator was able challenges was ' the surmount what belief and Rizzuto diplomacy committee to , along he , greatest . doing the determination s Helped by in
 challenges to Senator ' he Rizzuto diplomacy Helped along what surmount was doing . and able , in the was the by committee , greatest belief s determination
That contradicts the government's arguments that CPP premiums are not a payroll tax but, rather, a pension contribution. 
In their own report, the Department of Finance stated that employers' contributions to CPP and the Quebec Pension Plan are part of the compulsory payroll tax. 
The department warned against higher payroll taxes in that same report and called this tax just that, namely, a payroll tax.  
We on this side strongly believe there are a number of important issues contained in this bill that we should discuss before it is passed. 
There should be decreases in other taxes, perhaps other payroll taxes such as the employment insurance payroll tax, to make up for the increases in the CPP, so that the negative impact on jobs will not be felt as strongly.  
We should have a full evaluation of any changes to the Old Age Security system and how it will affect future incentives to save. 
The Auditor General should have free access not only to the fund but also to the board itself, lifting the limits on RRSP contributions so that people can have an opportunity to look after themselves, and removing the foreign investment restrictions on RRSP investments.  
Honourable senators, there are elements of truth in all things nefarious. 
That is why we call it propaganda. 
The government is an accomplished practitioner in this art of propaganda, with their plea to save the CPP and their prediction of dire consequences if action is not taken today, this minute. 
They made only token consultations. 
Invoking closure on the debate on Bill C-2 was the first indication of the government's intention. 
Now we are being told in the Senate by the government that it is important to act now because the Minister of Finance has an agreement with the provinces.  
The government's usual modus operandi is diversion, mixed with a little fabrication. 
It was convenient to have the diversion of a postal strike with its ensuing back-to-work legislation before the house while Bill C-2 was being introduced in the other place and closure was being imposed. 
It was also convenient for the government to falsely accuse the former prime minister of criminal intent and behaviour after its incompetence was fully exposed to the Canadian public following the Quebec referendum.  
It is not a question of means justifying the end. 
In this bill, the means and the end are equally wrong.  
Time allocation has been imposed seven times on other bills, most recently on third reading of Bill C-22, the Pearson airport bill. 
It was imposed on Bill C-110 which proposed certain constitutional amendments; on Bill C-12 which dealt with employment insurance; and on the committee report on Term 17. 
 Helped along Senator Rizzuto ' s diplomacy , determination and belief in what he was doing , the committee was able to surmount the greatest challenges .
 ' greatest what determination Senator challenges Helped by . was to belief , the along diplomacy in able Rizzuto committee surmount he doing was , and the
 in what by along committee he challenges Rizzuto ' was determination and the able the Senator greatest , was , surmount belief doing diplomacy to s Helped
 able was surmount in greatest what along belief and ' Senator the Helped was doing , Rizzuto challenges by to . committee the s determination he diplomacy
Senator Rizzuto was asked to supervise the 74 Liberal members who campaigned and worked for the No side at the regional and county levels. 
 campaigned the members at regional levels Liberal and county who . worked Senator supervise for was 74 to asked and No the Rizzuto side the
 Liberal was side asked supervise to for who worked county and at levels the . 74 Senator and campaigned No the Rizzuto members regional the
 and . to at levels No and was the Rizzuto the regional members 74 who county worked for the side campaigned Liberal asked supervise Senator
 Rizzuto the who for was side members and supervise No the county at worked . asked regional campaigned the and 74 levels Liberal Senator to
 Senator . regional side worked members Rizzuto supervise levels No campaigned at the 74 was the who to the and Liberal and asked county for
 worked supervise Senator the asked the side to county for who . regional and the at No and campaigned 74 was levels Rizzuto Liberal members
 . side worked 74 was members Senator who supervise Liberal and asked regional No county the Rizzuto the levels the campaigned at for to and
 at side Liberal the who campaigned for Rizzuto members Senator was supervise No the levels the county asked . 74 and and to regional worked
 asked supervise the regional at . members the side Senator Liberal county for 74 was Rizzuto and who the to and worked No levels campaigned
 and Rizzuto county for supervise to members at the the No Liberal the and 74 asked worked regional was who campaigned side levels . Senator
 was Senator 74 at the and No worked campaigned regional supervise the county side and who . asked to members the Liberal levels Rizzuto for
 campaigned the side worked was . 74 the Senator Liberal members regional for who and at and to No supervise levels asked county the Rizzuto
 Senator Liberal and for at was members levels and to 74 the the worked supervise Rizzuto No . county side who campaigned asked the regional
 Senator Liberal No members at county 74 and the who the levels the and supervise . asked campaigned to regional for worked was Rizzuto side
 74 who county for members regional and Senator side . Rizzuto to asked supervise and worked the at the was levels No the campaigned Liberal
 levels was Rizzuto who supervise at Liberal and and the Senator 74 for worked to . county members campaigned No regional asked side the the
In a telephone interview on Friday, Mr. Petter said the NDP government in British Columbia wants Ottawa to offset a dramatic increase in Canada Pension Plan premiums with reductions in UI premiums.  
"We're worried about the impact that Canada Pension Plan increases will have in terms of the burden they will impose on business and workers, and the potential they have to reduce job creation by a huge amount if they go ahead without some kind of offsetting relief," Mr. Petter said.  
Ontario's Conservative government is also demanding large cuts to UI premiums, Mr. Eves said in an interview...  
Alberta Treasurer Stockwell Day also indicated last week that he'll be pushing Mr. Martin for tax cuts.  
I predict today that, although this government has managed to get away with things for which our government would have been slaughtered, I think this bill, coupled with what is coming down the track and the changes in OAS and GIS, coupled with the arrogance of the stance taken at Kyoto, this is the kind of arrogance that, inevitably, will be the downfall of this government. 
I predict that that is about to happen.  
Hon. Thelma J. Chalifoux :
Honourable senators, I have a number of concerns regarding the statements of Senator Stratton. 
I would like to know what his position is on the working poor and on part-time workers. 
In this country, there are more part-time workers and more working poor than there are people who identify as middle class. 
What is the honourable senator's opinion on that?  
In this country, we have a totally isolated segment of society which is called "the mid-Canada corridor." 
Even in terms of communications, there is very little. 
What would the honourable senator do in the area of communication for those in isolated settlements regarding private pension plans? 
There are no words in Cree or michif for "private pension plan."  
I was a member of the working poor in 1965 and 1966 when this plan was put into force. 
I did not agree with the Canada Pension Plan. 
However, I will guarantee honourable senators right now that I totally agree with deductions being made, because now at least I have a pension.  
What will happen if this plan goes through is that the people in this country who really need it will get it. 
They have to travel 240 kilometres to the closest bank. 
 Senator Rizzuto was asked to supervise the 74 Liberal members who campaigned and worked for the No side at the and county levels .
 the at worked was 74 the Liberal members Rizzuto asked and for county the who levels regional and campaigned to Senator side supervise .
 for . worked No to members was the Senator county Rizzuto and supervise at regional campaigned and asked Liberal the the side levels who
 for regional campaigned Liberal 74 and to asked Rizzuto who . side No members Senator and was worked at supervise the the the county
He was also responsible, again with the executive, for gathering the support of the business people, a task at which he was very successful.  
 which , task , at successful the also of business gathering a very he . the He was was the executive again responsible , for people support with
 a the . He support at with people was for the he gathering very responsible task also was the successful , business of which , , executive again
 , a for , was the responsible the with executive was successful at people gathering which task business of he very . also again He support the ,
 also task gathering was which , responsible , for executive the He the he at , successful of was support a people very . the again business with
 He of responsible successful the for , which task support he was also business , was again executive the with people very gathering the , at . a
 , was executive the the He task of people the for support , which gathering responsible was successful business also with , again at a very . he
 was the , for , . , gathering the responsible also was task a he He at people business very again support of executive successful with the which
 also successful people was the support which he , was business He responsible the , gathering task the with of very again executive . a for at ,
 support gathering task of which with was the the very at business responsible , again executive . also people , was he successful the , for He a
 He the successful a with , at business task which he . the gathering of for executive support people very , responsible was also was , the again
 very responsible of support task a which he was was people at with , the for also the again executive business He , , gathering successful the .
 the he at successful . of was , people business He which task responsible the was again support also the very a , for gathering , executive with
 responsible . of task gathering , which at the for was , also again was , support the a business the very executive people with successful He he
 successful business which executive was very support , . he at , , the was the responsible of for people He the task with again gathering also a
 support very , , was for gathering again he , the task of was a executive the at people the which with He also business successful . responsible
 responsible he task was again the of the business support . , with gathering for a successful which at , people the was executive also very , He
Now they want a smaller CPP.  
However, Preston Manning could never explain the first program. 
Now they have a CPP program which they wanted to explain to the minister in committee. 
Well, they could not get it together. 
Preston Manning, who made a promise to do it before committee meetings ended in the other place, failed to do it. 
I can see why.  
They are making false accusations in the House about people. 
It is the typical Reform program we have come to expect. 
They are off in left field somewhere, although I do not think they would want to be described that way.  
Now they want to create a super-RRSP, which does not make any sense because, not only is it at odds with what they said in committee and what they said in the election campaign, it does not fit into their tax plan. 
Remember, they have a tax plan with a flat tax. 
With the flat tax, you reduce the amount of exemptions. 
We are not getting any ideas from them.  
Now I will turn to the Liberals.  
Senator Gigantès :
Be careful.  
Senator Tkachuk :
Since taking office, they have taken $300 million in new taxes from senior citizens by income-testing the age credit. 
They want Canadians to mature their RRSPs by the year they turn 69 rather than the previous age limit of 71. 
However, seniors do not know about it, and this will be another huge tax grab - Merry Christmas, Canada - by the Liberal Government and Paul Martin. 
 He was also responsible , again with the executive , for gathering the support of the business people a task at which he was very successful .
 , the at was . for gathering people , the of task which support He with a responsible , very the was again executive successful he also
 he . executive was successful , of people very responsible task which a the with support the for again at , He , was gathering the business
 was executive . of was responsible the again the for very he at , business successful He gathering also a the support which task people , with
He was also in charge of organizing a demonstration with seniors. 
 of was in demonstration seniors with also a charge . organizing He
 of also seniors a was with He in . demonstration organizing charge
 a with demonstration also seniors He . in charge was of organizing
 charge . was of with a organizing also demonstration seniors He in
 He charge a organizing of . also was in seniors demonstration with
 was charge seniors a . He with organizing of in also demonstration
 a of in seniors organizing with was demonstration charge . also He
 a was organizing . seniors demonstration also He with of in charge
 in of He a organizing seniors also with charge was . demonstration
 in organizing He was charge also a with seniors . of demonstration
 organizing a demonstration He with charge also in of seniors . was
 demonstration in of was organizing He a also . with seniors charge
 with . He a organizing seniors was demonstration also in of charge
 demonstration of . He a also was with charge organizing seniors in
 . of in charge a with organizing He was demonstration also seniors
 was charge with also . a seniors in of organizing demonstration He
That is a social program; a good social program, but it is coming out of the pension fund.  
We have spent all this cash over the last 30 years and we say now, "Oh, it is not our fault. 
It is not legislators' fault. 
Senator Gigantès :
Are you quoting the Reform Party?  
Senator Tkachuk :
I do not think so, although I have a few things to say about Reform here too, which I will get to right away.  
I would like to quote Preston Manning's comments from Tuesday, October 28, in committee. 
These are the other guys in the other place. 
He was speaking of Martin and Pettigrew.  
The alternative we would like the committee to consider rests on four pillars rather than three: the seniors benefit, which is targeted to lower-income people; a smaller, more focused CPP, not a scrapped CPP; 
There is the big change from the last election.  
...an expanded RRSP program; and tax relief to seniors. 
We will argue that our four-pillar plan delivers more retirement income per dollar invested than this three-pillar plan the government is putting forward.  
I think I have explained some of the ideas we got from the government side. 
The liability of $600 billion becomes unfunded if we all quit paying CPP premiums, but the obligations still have to be met. 
That is what Reform was proposing through the election campaign and over the previous four years. 
They have changed. 
Now they want a smaller CPP.  
However, Preston Manning could never explain the first program. 
 He was also charge of organizing a demonstration with seniors .
 in . He also was a with of charge demonstration organizing
 was in with a He . charge of seniors organizing demonstration
 organizing a of was also demonstration He . with in seniors
Again, our expectations were exceeded, what with the overwhelming participation of all these groups.  
 . all of exceeded , these with groups participation , our Again were expectations the what overwhelming
 our with participation all exceeded . groups Again , were overwhelming expectations what these , of the
 of our these with what , were expectations the , all groups participation . exceeded Again overwhelming
 Again groups of participation , expectations . were what these overwhelming all with our exceeded the ,
 , expectations were all with groups what exceeded . these of , Again our the overwhelming participation
 exceeded the participation , these expectations , Again our were overwhelming groups with of all . what
 all these , expectations overwhelming what were groups exceeded our participation . , of with the Again
 all exceeded , expectations participation were overwhelming the these Again groups of our what , with .
 participation were Again overwhelming groups all , with . our the of exceeded , expectations these what
 overwhelming expectations were , what . these Again with , groups the of participation our all exceeded
 these expectations with all groups . Again participation , of overwhelming were exceeded the what our ,
 groups with all were , our overwhelming expectations of exceeded participation what , these Again . the
 expectations the , participation what . overwhelming Again our all with groups were these , of exceeded
 , exceeded were of the our overwhelming expectations what . Again all , participation with these groups
 of with exceeded expectations the what were . all , overwhelming Again , participation these groups our
 these participation the what expectations , groups exceeded . all overwhelming our Again were with , of
And I stress this last part: 
...given current commitments to action.  
Could the Leader of the Government tell us if the relevant ministers are aware of this study, whether there have been any responses, or what the reaction has been to this prestigious firm's study?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
It provides very important data. 
I am not sure the government would necessarily agree with the findings of the study but, certainly, those findings will be taken into consideration.  
Senator Spivak :
I am glad to hear that.  
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Concept of Differing Targets-Government Position 
Hon. Mira Spivak :
In the current discussions in Kyoto, the idea of tailoring reductions targets to individual countries' economic and social profiles rather than having a one-size-fits-all commitment has gained some currency, particularly in view of the most recent American proposal. 
Where does the Canadian delegation stand with respect to this concept?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government):
Honourable senators, the media is reporting, of course, on a possible deal on targets and time-tables which could see Canada accepting a reduction of 5 per cent from 1990 levels bythe year 2010. 
At this point, these reports are speculative, but negotiations are ongoing.  
National Unity 
Recent Remarks of Prime Minister-Possible Conditions of Secession of Quebec-Government Position 
Hon. Pierre Claude Nolin :
Honourable senators, I would like to return to the matter of the Prime Minister's statement last weekend on Quebec's secession. 
He said in fact last week in Quebec City that he would be prepared to negotiate Quebec's separation, if certain conditions were met.  
 , our expectations were exceeded , what with the overwhelming participation of all these groups .
 these participation Again , exceeded all groups the expectations our overwhelming what of . with ,
 what . exceeded expectations , overwhelming of participation with , our were all Again these groups
 our were expectations participation of all with overwhelming these Again what , exceeded the groups .
Also, he sat on the strategy committee, which held some 30 meetings, even during weekends. 
 during on weekends , meetings 30 the some committee , even . he strategy which Also held , sat
 . during he meetings Also which some on , the committee , sat even , strategy 30 held weekends
 , he , held . which meetings the during committee weekends Also on , some sat even 30 strategy
 some strategy 30 the sat meetings , during . , even weekends Also he , held committee on which
 meetings . the 30 during Also sat , on , held , weekends which committee even strategy some he
 during some strategy committee . 30 the even sat held he Also on , weekends , meetings , which
 even on weekends strategy which 30 some he during the , , Also held , committee . sat meetings
 on Also the held 30 some during sat committee , . strategy weekends even he , meetings which ,
 , even held weekends he strategy , on the 30 meetings which Also . committee sat during some ,
 strategy weekends committee meetings on , , held which even , 30 the sat during he . some Also
 meetings he Also which 30 the sat some held committee during , on . strategy weekends , , even
 which even strategy sat he committee , 30 Also weekends some during on , meetings held the , .
 even Also 30 , the , meetings which sat during . he on some , weekends committee held strategy
 , some he during the committee strategy on sat Also even , . meetings , weekends held 30 which
 , . meetings some even which weekends sat during committee he 30 , held the on , Also strategy
 during Also held the , on 30 meetings . some , he even , which strategy weekends sat committee
I find it hard to believe how the Province of Quebec in the future, even if the notwithstanding clauses are removed, would not continue to fund denominational training. 
Whether it is through a charter school, a public school system, or through a publicly funded private school system, denominational training to all groups, in my view, will continue in the province of Quebec for the foreseeable future.  
Since we are projecting the future, that is my prediction for the future.  
I wish to mention yet another aspect of the testimony referred to in the Reform Party opinion which is appended to the report.  
At the last minute, after all the testimony was taken, the Reform members of the committee introduced a long petition containing thousands of names objecting to the federal resolution. 
Every opportunity was presented for these voices to be heard during the course of the hearings. 
We did not deny them an opportunity to be heard. 
On the other hand, we were not given an opportunity by the Reform Party to cross-examine those petitioners or to decide what weight, if any, we should give to their petition.  
I concluded, honourable senators, that the overwhelming evidence was that the majority of the minorities affected by these rights and privilege were in favour of the amendments.  
The Roman Catholic Archbishops of Quebec and the Anglican Archbishop have letters on record in which they clearly indicate they did not oppose the amendment.  
I want to read those letters into the record because they are important.  
A different situation exists in Quebec. 
Nevertheless, our assembly did not oppose the choice to amend section 93. 
It has always been our conviction that the choice of means is the responsibility of the political authorities.  
They did not oppose.  
The Anglican Archbishop, Archbishop Andrew S. Hutchison, said the following at paragraph 2 of his letter dated November 3: 
The amendments proposed to Article 93 by the Quebec government, which would remove the obligation for the Quebec government to have confessional school boards, seems reasonable to us and in keeping with traditional positions enunciated by the Anglican church.  
Honourable senators, the senior representatives of the mainstream Roman Catholic and Protestant groups did not register their opposition to these changes. 
This does not mean that this exercise was one of perfection. 
Indeed, many of us remain unhappy and regret the federal government's position taken with 23(1)( a ) then and now. 
 Also , he sat on the strategy committee which held some 30 meetings , even during weekends .
 weekends committee held , 30 on , Also meetings even some which strategy the during , sat .
 strategy sat the , Also even during weekends , . which committee some 30 held , on he
 some sat Also committee , 30 even , during the weekends which . held on strategy , he
Senator Rizzuto always attended like the real trooper he was. 
 he trooper like was the . Rizzuto attended real always Senator
 always the was he real Senator trooper attended like . Rizzuto
 he Senator Rizzuto trooper attended . real was the always like
 real Rizzuto he trooper was the . attended always Senator like
 . Senator Rizzuto real was attended always he the trooper like
 was real Senator Rizzuto attended he the like always trooper .
 the Rizzuto real always like attended he . Senator trooper was
 attended trooper real Rizzuto he . was Senator like the always
 he Rizzuto real always Senator attended was trooper like . the
 like . trooper attended Senator real he the was always Rizzuto
 was the like attended . he always Senator Rizzuto real trooper
 always was . attended he trooper the Rizzuto real like Senator
 always he attended Senator real was Rizzuto the like . trooper
 real trooper always he attended . Senator the like was Rizzuto
 . attended trooper always was real the Senator like Rizzuto he
 real the trooper attended Senator . was Rizzuto always like he
However, the Auditor General will report to the directors of the fund on how they manage their affairs. 
That is not acceptable.  
We are talking of $100 billion by the year 2006, and rapid increases thereafter. 
On this record, it will fail.  
It is an anomaly of governments to charge taxes for employment insurance premiums, and then reduce services to accumulate a surplus to pay down a deficit. 
It then writes cheques for something else. 
The government charges taxes for transportation then imposes user fees at airports and tolls on highways for the right to use the airports and highways that we have paid taxes to build and maintain. 
It imposes taxes to create historical sites and national parks and then charge people to get in. 
It charges premiums for pensions but, by the way, cannot pay those pensions, so the government has to charge us more.  
Look through the bill. 
It is simply paying more money for less benefits. 
Anyone can do that. 
Even the Liberals can do that.  
The government is unable to manage the present program so it wants more money to enable it to manage it better. 
We must remember that the author of Bill C-2 is Paul Martin. 
Paul Martin is a real smart guy. 
We remember that he had to stoop to bribing three Atlantic provinces, with other people's money, to fulfil his promises of harmonization. 
He later apologized to the Canadian people for misinforming them.  
Meanwhile, the Prime Minister and Deputy Prime Minister, Sheila Copps, were promising to get rid of the GST, but they did not really mean it, they said, although they were caught out on tape not telling the truth.  
Paul Martin promised in the old Red Book that the government would cancel the helicopter purchase and use the money to pay for more social programs. 
 Senator always attended like the real trooper he was .
 real the Senator was trooper always Rizzuto like . he
 the trooper was Senator real always Rizzuto . like attended
 attended Senator always Rizzuto . trooper he like real the
I do not think he missed any of these meetings.  
 these do I of meetings think he not missed . any
 any not missed do . I these meetings think of he
 he think missed not of these . do I any meetings
 meetings not missed any think . he of do these I
 think do not missed I meetings he of any . these
 missed I he do meetings any of not . these think
 of do I missed think not any meetings these he .
 these do . not think he any of meetings missed I
 meetings he I . not any these of do missed think
 do he missed of . any not I these meetings think
 do meetings . not think I these any he missed of
 I think not meetings these . missed of he do any
 I of think missed he . meetings these not any do
 missed meetings not . think do he these I any of
 do he these meetings not I missed think any . of
 any missed . these he meetings of think not do I
While some individual groups did not give evidence, as pointed out by Senator Wood, I concluded that, having examined the materials from those groups, that their viewpoint was indeed expressed by others during the course of those hearings. 
I believe no viewpoint was excluded from our deliberations.  
The time frames in the hearings in no way diminished the committee's ability to obtain or weigh the evidence. 
The committee made a thorough investigation of that evidence. 
No point of view went unexamined, save for one raised by the Reform Party at the last minute, and I will deal with that later.  
Let me for a moment repeat what we heard. 
There was a unanimous resolution, save for two abstentions, from the Quebec assembly. 
We heard from the opposition in the assembly; the Quebec government itself; English and French school boards; Catholic, Protestant and other teachers' groups; archbishops of the Roman Catholic church and the Anglican archbishop of Quebec, which I will deal with later; minority groups including Jewish, Arab, non-Roman Catholic and other allophone groups; students groups, both English and French. 
All agreed that linguistic school boards, which were a direct consequence of this amendment, were desirable and progressive.  
There was some dissent. 
I will briefly touch on it, as did Senator Bolduc in his most insightful speech, especially with respect to the plight of certain French-speaking Protestants and certain English-speaking Catholics. 
There is no question at all that some in those groups feel detrimentally affected.  
Again, under the current Quebec law 109, the notwithstanding clauses had been included, both with respect to the Quebec Charter and the federal Charter of Rights and Freedoms, therefore allowing for denominational teaching to be continued in Quebec. 
How the Quebec government will ultimately continue to afford opportunities for denominational teaching is a much more difficult question to predict. 
However, it is clear to me, from all the evidence I heard and carefully cross-examined, that the majorities of the so-called minorities favoured this change. 
There appeared to be some exceptions at the outset that must be addressed.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, I regret to interrupt but the allotted 15 minutes has expired. 
Is leave granted for Senator Grafstein to continue?  
Hon. Senators :
 I do not think he missed any of meetings .
 missed he any . meetings of not I these do
 any think I he missed . do not these of
 think do of he . I any these not missed
After the 1980 referendum, Senator Rizzuto took part in fundraising campaigns for the Quebec wing of the Liberal Party of Canada. 
 Party Canada wing referendum for the fundraising Rizzuto of took part Liberal . 1980 campaigns After of the Senator the Quebec , in
 of the Quebec campaigns , part Senator Liberal Party the of wing took for fundraising referendum in Canada 1980 Rizzuto the After .
 the part After campaigns referendum fundraising , 1980 Senator Liberal for Canada . the Rizzuto took in of wing the Quebec Party of
 Senator Quebec Canada Liberal campaigns wing of fundraising the took for in part Rizzuto the , the Party After of referendum 1980 .
 referendum Quebec Liberal After the Canada part Rizzuto the , of in for campaigns Senator fundraising of the took wing . 1980 Party
 referendum Canada Senator , Quebec of campaigns 1980 Party for . After took in wing part the fundraising the of Liberal the Rizzuto
 part Senator the in the , Canada of referendum for After . 1980 Liberal of Quebec Party the took Rizzuto campaigns fundraising wing
 , campaigns fundraising the for in Canada 1980 took Quebec of Party the wing Liberal Rizzuto part . the of referendum Senator After
 in campaigns Liberal Rizzuto of for the Senator After . Party wing 1980 , fundraising took of Canada part referendum the Quebec the
 Canada of . referendum the fundraising for , the Senator Party Quebec Liberal Rizzuto the wing 1980 part After in of campaigns took
 the of for the After Party Canada 1980 Liberal fundraising Quebec referendum part in Senator took campaigns . Rizzuto of , wing the
 the Senator Quebec Rizzuto After fundraising of Liberal Party 1980 the in Canada . wing the took , campaigns for referendum of part
 . Liberal Party Rizzuto took referendum Quebec of Senator the the 1980 After Canada in the for , fundraising of part wing campaigns
 After Quebec of in took part for Rizzuto wing 1980 Canada Senator . , of the campaigns fundraising Liberal Party the the referendum
 Rizzuto in Liberal , of part the Quebec fundraising took referendum After of campaigns the the for Party . Senator wing 1980 Canada
 for Senator Party referendum part Canada campaigns . the 1980 After took Rizzuto Liberal fundraising wing of the , of Quebec in the
I believe no viewpoint was excluded from our deliberations.  
The time frames in the hearings in no way diminished the committee's ability to obtain or weigh the evidence. 
The committee made a thorough investigation of that evidence. 
No point of view went unexamined, save for one raised by the Reform Party at the last minute, and I will deal with that later.  
Let me for a moment repeat what we heard. 
There was a unanimous resolution, save for two abstentions, from the Quebec assembly. 
We heard from the opposition in the assembly; the Quebec government itself; English and French school boards; Catholic, Protestant and other teachers' groups; archbishops of the Roman Catholic church and the Anglican archbishop of Quebec, which I will deal with later; minority groups including Jewish, Arab, non-Roman Catholic and other allophone groups; students groups, both English and French. 
All agreed that linguistic school boards, which were a direct consequence of this amendment, were desirable and progressive.  
There was some dissent. 
I will briefly touch on it, as did Senator Bolduc in his most insightful speech, especially with respect to the plight of certain French-speaking Protestants and certain English-speaking Catholics. 
There is no question at all that some in those groups feel detrimentally affected.  
Again, under the current Quebec law 109, the notwithstanding clauses had been included, both with respect to the Quebec Charter and the federal Charter of Rights and Freedoms, therefore allowing for denominational teaching to be continued in Quebec. 
How the Quebec government will ultimately continue to afford opportunities for denominational teaching is a much more difficult question to predict. 
However, it is clear to me, from all the evidence I heard and carefully cross-examined, that the majorities of the so-called minorities favoured this change. 
There appeared to be some exceptions at the outset that must be addressed.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, I regret to interrupt but the allotted 15 minutes has expired. 
Is leave granted for Senator Grafstein to continue?  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
 After the 1980 referendum , Senator Rizzuto took part in fundraising campaigns for the Quebec wing of the Liberal Party of Canada
 . the part of , Party fundraising referendum in of campaigns Senator 1980 the Rizzuto Quebec Liberal wing the After Canada for
 Canada the fundraising Senator Party took , . 1980 Liberal the Rizzuto of wing for campaigns part the referendum in of After
 took Liberal fundraising the , the the Canada of . part 1980 After Quebec in of wing referendum Party for Senator campaigns
In 1981, 1982 and 1983, he was very successful in raising millions of dollars.  
 , of raising very 1981 was successful In he dollars millions in . 1983 1982 , and
 was 1981 millions of . , dollars and successful , in raising In 1983 very 1982 he
 in 1983 , he 1982 was millions , . 1981 and successful dollars In very raising of
 and millions he . 1982 dollars , of in raising successful 1981 was , very In 1983
 dollars he of , millions was 1982 successful 1981 very In , raising in . 1983 and
 very dollars , millions was raising 1981 and In , of in he successful . 1983 1982
 1981 dollars raising very , of millions , successful 1983 . in 1982 was In he and
 raising . and was 1982 millions very 1981 in , dollars In 1983 he of , successful
 1983 , in dollars , 1982 1981 raising In millions and . of very was successful he
 millions 1983 1981 dollars 1982 was of , and successful In he , raising very in .
 successful of 1982 , he , 1981 raising millions and In . 1983 was very dollars in
 , was in 1983 very dollars 1982 raising . 1981 , of successful he In millions and
 , in dollars In and very was 1982 millions successful of . 1981 he raising 1983 ,
 millions he was 1981 1982 , raising . of In very and 1983 in dollars , successful
 raising millions , , in very 1981 In was and dollars successful he 1983 of . 1982
 of In 1983 was , and , raising . dollars 1981 successful 1982 very in he millions
Many schools have little, if any, religious content, while in others it is very strong. 
Parents already have a say in how much religion they want their children exposed to and that will continue under the new system.  
While section 93 guarantees are only a matter of religious denominations, the essential characteristics of the resulting Quebec school system have, nonetheless, been linguistic. 
One does not speak often of going to a Catholic or Protestant school any more. 
One usually speaks of going to a French or an English school. 
It was inevitable, then, that the committee would be drawn into a debate on how the amendment of section 93 might affect linguistic rights, particularly those claimed by the minority.  
While section 23 of the Charter establishes minority linguistic education rights, Quebec is not bound by all its provisions and so has adopted legislation in this field which, in effect, creates two classes of English-speaking Quebecers as it distinguishes between those educated in Canada and those educated elsewhere. 
Only those parents educated in English in Canada can pass on the benefit of minority English language education to their children. 
Those Quebec parents who were educated in English outside of Canada must have their children educated in French. 
We have in Quebec two classes of English-speaking Quebecers.  
Quebec has been repeatedly criticized for this discrimination, and rightly so. 
How this undesirable situation developed can be traced to the then Minister of Justice, who is Prime Minister today.  
I will quote from his book, Straight from the Heart , where Mr. Chrétien describes how he was responsible for exempting Quebec from the crucial parts of section 23. 
He says: 
During the weeks that followed, I continued to try to overcome Quebec's objections, to the extent of modifying the principle of minority language education and agreeing to fiscal compensation when Quebec opted out of amendments that affected culture and education. 
That required a hell of a lot of selling to Trudeau, but he went along in the end, as did the nine other premiers, who were willing to reopen their sealed bargain in order to bring in Quebec. 
Mr. Chrétien goes on to say: 
I used to joke that these were the first constitutional amendments in history to have been negotiated over the telephone.  
Let it be noted that Mr. Chrétien takes pride of authorship - "of modifying the principle of minority education...". 
He boasts of getting the agreement of then Prime Minister Trudeau and the nine other premiers, and finds it amusing that this inexcusable abandonment of a fundamental principle was secured over the telephone.  
 In 1981 , 1982 and 1983 , he was very successful in raising of dollars .
 successful in he 1981 raising . 1983 millions , very 1982 dollars was In of and
 raising and was 1982 1983 millions in dollars 1981 successful , of . very , In
 was 1983 1982 , . millions dollars of raising In , successful in very 1981 he
I could never understand how this businessman could get so totally immersed in all kinds of social endeavours et still manage to be a regular figure in the Senate and be so effective. 
 I in this all to businessman effective et and how a be figure never totally endeavours manage regular . in still of understand could so social so kinds be immersed get Senate could the
 regular understand so I manage figure social of kinds totally how a never so be in endeavours et be . and to the still could this all Senate effective immersed in get could businessman
 could I so how manage this Senate in kinds in to et figure and still effective . all a never so be be social could understand the regular totally endeavours businessman of get immersed
 totally in endeavours to how so effective understand kinds a . regular Senate of I et could could manage be figure immersed still the be get social in so never and all this businessman
 of be et how Senate social all to and I effective be in understand could businessman endeavours in kinds so this a manage still could get totally so never the . figure immersed regular
 get understand and Senate could so immersed be this in of in manage so how I could to et a still endeavours be never . figure all social regular totally effective businessman kinds the
 and social effective so endeavours regular businessman the Senate could how totally manage . understand immersed I never in so of all et in still could get be a kinds figure this to be
 endeavours all kinds the get a understand still immersed totally how et in regular and never could effective businessman I of to . so Senate social be be figure manage in could this so
 immersed endeavours in social businessman manage totally . to et the all how could understand never be still kinds a figure regular so Senate and could this get of in so be effective I
 so this kinds regular . could how could still effective I so get be understand businessman of et all never in be to endeavours manage immersed social totally the in and Senate figure a
 so in in the et figure manage social . be understand could be kinds still I a of get regular Senate never immersed could to businessman and effective totally so how all endeavours this
 . endeavours Senate could immersed never et understand the could and so so how still regular in a in figure be all effective this be social totally kinds manage get of to I businessman
 I understand still totally could endeavours in immersed be businessman . how et all kinds of and never in regular so be manage effective could this Senate the to a get social so figure
 of be the . I social be understand could a immersed in how to in figure this all totally manage businessman get still could endeavours so so and regular et Senate effective kinds never
 Senate this so effective be I could in regular totally of to the never get how figure understand endeavours a so et immersed businessman all and social be . manage could still in kinds
 all I endeavours still get could kinds never effective to in how social of totally figure businessman Senate manage could so immersed understand the this in a so et and be . regular be
But even if that were the case, in the five extensive public consultations carried out over the past five years, the reform of public education in Quebec was the major issue - and it is the organizational structures guaranteed by section 93 which obviously are impeding this reform. 
This very public debate necessarily raised the question of whether the Constitution should be amended to solve this problem.  
After hearing the witnesses, the committee was satisfied that a majority of Catholic and Protestant parents - the two groups concerned - supported the amendment to section 93.  
One aspect of the issue that was frequently mentioned is the Quebec National Assembly's unanimous support of Bill 109 and the amendment to section 93. 
Such unanimous votes are significant, but they do not mean there is a consensus in the Catholic and Protestant communities, whose privileges are at stake. 
Such unanimity in the Quebec National Assembly proves nevertheless that support for the amendment transcends party lines. 
The PQ government was reluctant to propose that amendment, because it involved using the amending formula provided for in the Constitution Act of 1982, which that government refuses to recognize. 
The government finally yielded to the pressures from Liberal opposition members.  
Some people were concerned that the debate on national unity might detract from the substance of the amendment. 
If the only concern of the special joint committee had been to prove that "federalism works," it would not have insisted on hearing this evidence showing that there was a consensus among Catholic and Protestant parents. 
From the very beginning, the Government of Quebec assured this Parliament that there was an appropriate consensus in favour of the amendment in that province. 
However, the committee insisted on assessing and challenging these statements - so much so that the Quebec ministers responsible for education and for intergovernmental affairs eventually appeared before the committee, along with the official opposition critics on these matters. 
Clearly, what was - and still is - at issue is the legitimacy of the amendment.  
It was mentioned repeatedly that, as a result of the Supreme Court decisions, it has become obvious that the rights that are positively guaranteed under section 93 are not as broad as they were originally assumed to be. 
However, we do not believe that the amendment was justified because the denominational education rights guaranteed under section 93 were nothing more than empty shells. 
Had we been satisfied that the majority of Catholics or Protestants in Quebec were opposed to the amendment, it would not have mattered whether or not their rights carried much weight. 
I think that Senator Lavoie-Roux was quite right in saying that minorities often require special protection to be free to exercise their rights. 
But it is possible to limit or remove this special protection with the consent of a majority of this minority.  
It was then a matter of figuring out why a majority of members of these two groups were prepared to relinquish these privileges. 
It is important to point out that representatives of all the groups involved were consulted.  
 I could never understand how this businessman could get so totally immersed in all kinds of social endeavours et still manage be a regular figure in the Senate and be so effective .
 be still businessman in and so all endeavours et could understand could in social of so I the totally effective immersed to get kinds figure how . be never Senate a this manage
 totally . never to understand be all figure could immersed the get social how Senate effective a in could in manage this of and businessman so I be et so regular still endeavours
 still this immersed how so be to in et be Senate never a totally in figure social regular understand the . effective and of so all could endeavours businessman manage could get kinds
He was a remarkable man.  
 remarkable He . a was man
 a He man was remarkable .
 was . a He remarkable man
 . remarkable He a was man
 man was remarkable He . a
 was man He . a remarkable
 man was He . a remarkable
 He remarkable a was . man
 remarkable was a man He .
 . remarkable was man He a
 . He was a remarkable man
 man . remarkable was a He
 He a . was man remarkable
 He was man a . remarkable
 man He remarkable was . a
 . man a remarkable was He
Savings coming from private pension plans should remain stable in the future or else get smaller depending on the decisions we make. 
Contributions will increase by 70 per cent within five to seven years. 
I think the amounts will remain stable, but they could also drop, if this increase is not compensated by an equivalent decrease in income tax, for instance.  
As for RRSPs, they are likely to diminish if employment insurance contributions and taxes are not lowered.  
In my opinion, we will likely see a reduction in private savings, along with an increase in public savings. 
Is it a good thing to increase the role of the state? 
This is what is being done here. 
It implies that if it is in the public domain, the money will be better invested than if individuals invest their savings in the private sector. 
Who can possibly think that it makes sense?  
What happened in the past? 
Can it be said that the government was more cautious than individuals in the management of its funds? 
I am not blaming one government in particular, but the public sector's attitude is often like that. 
I simply note that this is the way things have been done for 40 years.  
Did the government display more shrewdness in the management of business investments? 
Look at the performance of crown corporations. 
Air Canada, CN and Canadair all did well after being privatized. 
In other words, good management started once the government was no longer involved.  
So, we should be cautious before giving the public sector increased responsibilities for the management of funds. 
We must be careful before transferring money from the private to the public sector.  
Let us now look at the impact of the plan on jobs.  
 He was a remarkable .
 man . He remarkable a
 a remarkable He man .
 He . a remarkable was
I could go on and on, but I will stop here.  
 go , but could will on here and stop I I on .
 but could go on on here . and stop I I will ,
 here go could I I but and will . on stop , on
 and I , but will here stop could . on I on go
 on go and . here on stop , I will could but I
 will I I and on go could on here stop . , but
 and . go here could stop will I on , on I but
 go will here stop on , I I . on but and could
 stop could . here go I on and on , will but I
 will go here on could I . stop , but on and I
 will could on . and on I I here but , go stop
 but I will on here stop and on could go , . I
 here on stop could . on and , I but I go will
 will on and stop . , I could go on here but I
 , and go on on stop I but will I . here could
 on go stop I I on , and but . here could will
He said that he did not ask the parents whether they were for or against the amendment to section 93.  
This is one of the largest groups in Quebec. 
If Mr. Stronach is part of the "for" or "against" theory, then there is a problem with the whole concept put forth by my honourable friend.  
My honourable friend spoke of the Estates General, but he did not refer to their minority report, which covered over 70 per cent of their membership. 
Why are my figures different from those of my honourable friend?  
Senator Grafstein :
Again, honourable senators, this is a question of evidence. 
I refer all senators to the transcript.  
I wish to speak specifically about the fact that we are dealing with elites as opposed to the groups they represent. 
We questioned these representatives during the hearings as to whether their underlying groups agreed with the position they had taken.  
On the Catholic side, we had the position of the archbishops, as limited as it was. 
We had Catholic school boards and Catholic teachers. 
I remember specifically cross-examining Catholic teachers and asking whether they had discussions with students and their parents respecting the changes. 
Their view was that they represented the broad consensus of parents and students as it applied to this amendment. 
All parents wanted a change to renovate the school system, and this was the best modality in which to do that.  
I agree with Senator Lynch-Staunton, Senator Wood and Senator Lavoie-Roux that this is not perfect. 
However, in addition to the evidence, we did refer to opinion polls that seemed to suggest a strong support for reform along these lines.  
Yes, the resolution is imperfect. 
We would like to have done it "our way," as Frank Sinatra used to say, but we must deal with the Province of Quebec in this case. 
We had to bend imperfect tools to see whether they fit our minimum requirements. 
 I could on and on , but I will stop here .
 stop go , I and . on on but here could will
 and but here . stop I go could will , I on
 I , stop . and could on I will but on go
But I kept calling him Senator and using the formal "vous." 
 ." him But Senator using " kept the calling vous I formal and
 the using kept vous calling But Senator and ." formal I " him
 " But I him using formal ." the and kept vous calling Senator
 vous But " and him Senator using formal I ." the kept calling
 ." Senator the But calling " using formal kept I and him vous
 " formal vous using kept him I ." and But Senator calling the
 Senator the formal ." calling kept and I " But him vous using
 ." I Senator vous But " using calling him formal kept and the
 formal him and " vous I ." But the calling Senator kept using
 ." using the formal " and him But calling vous Senator I kept
 the I him formal and " ." vous calling using kept Senator But
 formal ." " Senator using But I vous calling the and kept him
 and I " kept But the using ." calling formal him Senator vous
 the But kept calling him ." vous formal using Senator and I "
 Senator " using the But formal and kept ." I vous calling him
 Senator kept and I the " ." using But formal vous calling him
The Auditor General should have free access not only to the fund but also to the board itself, lifting the limits on RRSP contributions so that people can have an opportunity to look after themselves, and removing the foreign investment restrictions on RRSP investments.  
Honourable senators, there are elements of truth in all things nefarious. 
That is why we call it propaganda. 
The government is an accomplished practitioner in this art of propaganda, with their plea to save the CPP and their prediction of dire consequences if action is not taken today, this minute. 
They made only token consultations. 
Invoking closure on the debate on Bill C-2 was the first indication of the government's intention. 
Now we are being told in the Senate by the government that it is important to act now because the Minister of Finance has an agreement with the provinces.  
The government's usual modus operandi is diversion, mixed with a little fabrication. 
It was convenient to have the diversion of a postal strike with its ensuing back-to-work legislation before the house while Bill C-2 was being introduced in the other place and closure was being imposed. 
It was also convenient for the government to falsely accuse the former prime minister of criminal intent and behaviour after its incompetence was fully exposed to the Canadian public following the Quebec referendum.  
It is not a question of means justifying the end. 
In this bill, the means and the end are equally wrong.  
Time allocation has been imposed seven times on other bills, most recently on third reading of Bill C-22, the Pearson airport bill. 
It was imposed on Bill C-110 which proposed certain constitutional amendments; on Bill C-12 which dealt with employment insurance; and on the committee report on Term 17. 
It is becoming a habit; a habit that is hard to break.  
Bill C-2 is just another in a series of bad bills, incompetent work and dictatorial action. 
It was introduced last week in the Senate, preceded by time allocation in the other place. 
With passage of this bill, the government will be imposing the largest tax grab in the history of the country. 
Canadians are unaware of what is happening, in particular our young people who will be the most affected and the most mistreated. 
We owe it to them, our grandchildren and our children, to study this legislation thoroughly and to amend it, because it is not their fault that this program has been so badly managed. 
 But I kept him Senator and using the formal " vous ."
 formal Senator I kept " him vous ." using and But the
 But Senator the formal vous and kept ." calling using " I
 I him using calling kept vous formal ." " the and But
Dear Mrs. Rizzuto, 
 Mrs Rizzuto . , Dear
 Dear , Mrs Rizzuto .
 , Rizzuto Dear . Mrs
 , Mrs . Dear Rizzuto
 Mrs Dear . Rizzuto ,
 Dear Mrs , Rizzuto .
 Dear Rizzuto , . Mrs
 Dear , Mrs . Rizzuto
 , Dear Rizzuto . Mrs
 , Mrs Dear . Rizzuto
 , Dear Rizzuto . Mrs
 Rizzuto . Dear Mrs ,
 Rizzuto Mrs . , Dear
 Dear . , Rizzuto Mrs
 . , Dear Mrs Rizzuto
 Dear . Rizzuto , Mrs
How would you know?  
Senator Gigantès :
You want surveillance cameras?  
Senator Tkachuk :
So there is an opportunity for fraud. 
This is not a pension program. 
Let us make that clear. 
This is a payroll tax to pay Old Age Pensions, disability, life insurance, benefits to survivors, orphans, children, or exemptions for child rearing. 
We did not have that either, and there is nothing wrong with that. 
They decided that seven years of child rearing would make you part of the CPP labour force, and therefore you can get benefits. 
That is a social program; a good social program, but it is coming out of the pension fund.  
We have spent all this cash over the last 30 years and we say now, "Oh, it is not our fault. 
It is not legislators' fault. 
Senator Gigantès :
Are you quoting the Reform Party?  
Senator Tkachuk :
I do not think so, although I have a few things to say about Reform here too, which I will get to right away.  
I would like to quote Preston Manning's comments from Tuesday, October 28, in committee. 
These are the other guys in the other place. 
He was speaking of Martin and Pettigrew.  
 Dear Mrs Rizzuto ,
 . Mrs Rizzuto Dear
 , . Rizzuto Mrs
 Dear Mrs . ,
It is with great sadness that I learned of the passing of my colleague and friend Pietro. 
 I that It Pietro learned of . great is with sadness my colleague of passing and friend the
 of passing my is the that learned great colleague sadness Pietro friend . I and It of with
 with sadness the colleague of friend my It Pietro is of passing great . learned I that and
 of . colleague the is sadness learned friend passing with It that my Pietro I great and of
 friend colleague that of my with the . Pietro great passing of I It is learned and sadness
 the passing sadness that of my learned is I friend Pietro . and great of colleague It with
 with passing of great is the friend It my and Pietro sadness colleague . learned I of that
 great Pietro learned my is friend and I the with It sadness . that colleague of of passing
 I . and the my with friend sadness of It great learned Pietro that of colleague is passing
 friend It colleague that Pietro . passing the of sadness of learned with my is I great and
 my sadness learned of passing and friend Pietro the I . great with colleague of It is that
 It my of great I Pietro learned friend colleague and with is of that sadness the . passing
 colleague learned . I Pietro great that of the friend my and passing with is It of sadness
 of I with learned that the Pietro passing colleague friend my and It . is great of sadness
 of passing colleague that the is learned with It great my of . sadness and I friend Pietro
 friend with is sadness colleague I and learned of . It passing the that my of Pietro great
The government would have us believe that this amount represents an increase in health care payments. 
However, the figures indicate otherwise.  
The following year, in 1999-2000, they will only be $3.748 billion. 
Yet, the government claimed yesterday that it was implementing a stable transfer system. 
In fact, cash payments paid to Quebec for health and education will be reduced by over $300 million over a five-year period. 
Honourable senators, I remind you that these cuts are in addition to this year's reduction of $700 million compared to last year. 
Could the minister make inquiries and inform the Senate of the reasons why, in spite of a cash floor set at $12.5 billion, Quebec's share will diminish by $307 million over the next five years?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
The federal government cut its own spending earlier, more drastically and in greater measure than transfers to the provinces. 
The government has made it clear that it will use increased fiscal flexibility to make strategic investments in priority areas, and action was taken early and directly on that commitment based on favourable fiscal results that emerged this past spring.  
With respect to individual provinces, I do not have those numbers. 
However, I would be happy to provide them for my honourable friend.  
Senator Roberge :
Could the minister find out at the same time why, in the same time period, Ontario's share of the cash transfers will increase to $173 million?  
Senator Graham :
Yes. 
While I am doing that, I should like to remind the honourable senator that even before the federal government balances the books, it is putting more money into transfers to the provinces. 
In fact, the government is raising the cash floor from $11 billion to $12.5 billion, the single largest reinvestment made by the federal government. 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Provinces-Effect on Atlantic Provinces 
Hon. Mabel M. DeWare :
 It is with great sadness that I learned the passing of my colleague and friend Pietro .
 the of that colleague of Pietro my great I is It with passing sadness . and friend
 Pietro great It of is my friend sadness colleague and of the . that I with learned
 of I great and my is Pietro friend that It with passing learned . of colleague the
I wish to offer to you and your family my most sincere condolences.  
 wish condolences most your to I my . to sincere offer and you family
 most and my condolences wish offer to your to I you family sincere .
 offer your most condolences family I sincere my you . to wish and to
 my and to offer you I wish sincere . to family your most condolences
 . I and condolences family to wish offer your you to sincere my most
 . your you offer I condolences sincere family most to to my wish and
 to family my I and sincere offer your condolences most to wish you .
 your sincere to and wish I offer to my you condolences family . most
 my to family condolences and most to I your wish . sincere offer you
 you condolences I wish sincere offer family your . to most my to and
 most sincere your condolences to and . you wish offer my I to family
 family I wish you to most my your to sincere and offer . condolences
 most to sincere family condolences your offer . and my wish I you to
 family and to to you your . most I wish condolences my sincere offer
 sincere my to to I wish you family your . condolences offer most and
 wish my family I to to most and offer sincere you condolences your .
Kirk Nangreaves of Saint-Hubert, Quebec, is studying at the University of Ottawa Arts Faculty.  
He is majoring in psychology.  
On behalf of all senators and the Senate, I bid you welcome.  
SENATORS' STATEMENTS 
The Senate 
Response to Newspaper Article on Senator's Residency Qualifications 
Hon. Colin Kenny :
Honourable senators, I rise today on behalf of a colleague who cannot be present, Senator Paul Lucier. 
Senator Lucier has sent me a fax which he has asked me to communicate to the chamber. 
For your benefit, he wants me to reply to the comments made about him in the media recently.  
He writes: 
I would like to make some points with respect to this matter: 
The Citizen said: "Paul Lucier said the Senate's legal staff approved his change in residency five years ago when he moved to Vancouver."  
Senator Lucier says: 
This is not true. 
I never spoke with legal staff five years ago about this. 
I never had any problem about residency.  
2. The Citizen said: "He said Senate staff told him he could keep his seat as long as he continues to own property in the Yukon."  
Senator Lucier replies: 
Again, I never spoke to the staff and was therefore never told any such comment. 
 I wish to offer to you and your family my most sincere condolences
 . family you to wish condolences most your sincere to my and I
 your I most my condolences to . sincere wish family to you offer
 your offer you condolences my . wish most to family sincere I to
My prayers are with you in this period of grief.  
 of grief you this period in . prayers with My are
 grief . My are of period in prayers with you this
 are period you of in . grief with this prayers My
 with grief period this in My . are of prayers you
 prayers with . this in you of My grief are period
 in My with this of period prayers are grief you .
 My in period . of with you this grief are prayers
 with period are this . grief My prayers in of you
 period this grief My you are prayers of in with .
 in this of My period grief you . with prayers are
 in are period with of grief you this My prayers .
 prayers are in of this My grief . with you period
 this in of period prayers you My are . with grief
 of with . grief prayers in this are you period My
 My prayers period you grief with are this of . in
 My grief of with . period you prayers are in this
Quebec wants to proceed by the rule of law. 
They are seeking to renovate their system under the rule of law and the Constitution.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
That is not my question.  
Senator Grafstein :
I assume that if they choose to proceed, they can. 
However, why should we in the Senate allow any province to proceed in a way that we consider unlawful? 
If there is an amendment to the Constitution, each senator in his or her heart and mind, after reviewing the testimony, must come to a conclusion. 
He or she can either vote for, against or abstain from the vote on the resolution.  
They want to be under the law, as does the Province of Newfoundland. 
They want to be under the Constitution. 
If they meet the standards of a constitutional change, I, for one, will support them, notwithstanding the fact that I mistrust their motivation and mistrust what they say. 
However, on matter of dealing with the rule of law, I am bound by the rule of law.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
My question has nothing to do with that answer. 
It was renewed in 1982 and given protection from the Charter. 
Quebec has finally adopted a linguistic school system that looks very promising and can be implemented without section 93 being amended, unlike Newfoundland, which needs an amendment to Term 17 to be able to implement a non-denominational system. 
The two resolutions are completely different in content and intent.  
Again, my question relates to the fact that the new linguistic school board process is well under way. 
There will be elections to the boards in June. 
 My prayers are with you in this period of grief
 grief prayers . this are with My in of period
 with in are My you period of grief . this
 period grief prayers My with this of you in .
Sincerely yours.  
 . yours Sincerely
 yours Sincerely .
 yours Sincerely .
 . Sincerely yours
 yours Sincerely .
 Sincerely . yours
 Sincerely yours .
 yours Sincerely .
 . yours Sincerely
 yours Sincerely .
 Sincerely yours .
 . yours Sincerely
 . Sincerely yours
 yours Sincerely .
 . yours Sincerely
 Sincerely . yours
As parliamentarians, honourable senators, it is our role to help promote this book and educate our fellow citizens on their rights as voters.  
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
Report of Committee 
Hon. Ron Ghitter , Chair of the Standing Senate Committee on Energy, the Environment and Natural Resources, presented the following report: 
Tuesday, December 9, 1997 
The Standing Senate Committee on Energy, the Environment and Natural Resources has the honour to present its 
SECOND REPORT 
Respectfully submitted, 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this bill be read the third time?  
On motion of Senator Butts, bill placed on the Orders of the Day for third reading at the next sitting of the Senate.  
Income Tax Conventions Implementation Act, 1997 
Report of Committee 
Hon. Michael Kirby , Chairman of the Standing Senate Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce, presented the following report: 
Tuesday, December 9, 1997 
The Standing Senate Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce has the honour to present its 
SIXTH REPORT 
Your Committee, to which was referred the Bill C-10, Act to implement a convention between Canada and Sweden, a convention between Canada and the Republic of Kazakhstan, a convention between Canada and the Republic of Iceland and a convention between Canada and the Kingdom of Denmark for the avoidance of double taxation and the prevention of fiscal evasion with respect to taxes on income and to amend the Canada-Netherlands Income Tax Convention Act, 1986 and the Canada-United States Tax Convention Act, 1984, has examined the said Bill in obedience to its Order of Reference dated December 8, 1997, and now reports the same without amendment.  
Respectfully submitted, 
The Hon. the Speaker :
 Sincerely .
 yours .
 . yours
 Sincerely yours
I would like to conclude by reiterating my sincere condolences to his wife Pina, his three children and his numerous relatives. 
 my Pina relatives three . I wife , to conclude his would his his condolences children reiterating to and like by sincere numerous
 my Pina and sincere condolences reiterating three his to by wife , his I would his relatives . children to numerous like conclude
 would to sincere children . and conclude condolences relatives I Pina like his my his by , three reiterating wife to his numerous
 children reiterating and conclude condolences . three his , his like by relatives would to my I sincere to Pina wife numerous his
 reiterating wife his conclude children relatives condolences I three to Pina sincere numerous his his like to . my , would by and
 sincere by . condolences three his Pina his reiterating , and I would wife to to his conclude like numerous my relatives children
 , Pina three would condolences my his like wife and children . reiterating I by to numerous sincere his to conclude his relatives
 I , wife three children reiterating his by my would numerous relatives his condolences conclude . to Pina to and like sincere his
 like to and his , conclude would Pina three reiterating . sincere relatives his my by wife numerous children I to his condolences
 his would three to to . I Pina his relatives numerous by sincere children like , his wife reiterating and conclude condolences my
 , conclude children I Pina relatives and reiterating . would by sincere his numerous wife to his like three to my his condolences
 and to by reiterating three sincere Pina . his like would wife condolences children I his conclude my his relatives to , numerous
 like wife , numerous his conclude to I my his sincere reiterating . and condolences his three relatives by would to children Pina
 condolences and , I children to like numerous . by sincere his Pina his relatives wife conclude to three reiterating would his my
 my his conclude reiterating and wife would to relatives , his condolences children three by like I Pina sincere . to numerous his
 , by my . and like numerous his children relatives reiterating his his Pina would three condolences sincere conclude I to wife to
Senator Tkachuk :
Because the Liberals would not agree. 
I will defend my government, and my honourable friend will defend his.  
I will not delve too far into the OAS because there are other speakers who wish to deal with this issue over the next two weeks. 
Perhaps we, as senators, will be able to discuss this matter well into the new year, which I hope we do.  
Senator Gigantès :
You are reading from the wrong script.  
Senator Taylor :
It is obvious that my honourable friend does not have any notes.  
Senator Tkachuk :
I think I am getting to honourable senators opposite.  
I was told by the Honourable Senator Kirby that members opposite would only have one speaker on this issue. 
I have a feeling that we may hear from a few more senators after I and other senators point out some of the weaknesses in Bill C-2.  
Honourable senators, I would reiterate that this is not a pension program: this is a payroll tax! 
In the past, it harboured cheap loans for provinces, and it will harbour a $100-billion fund that will grow to a $1-trillion fund. 
Honourable senators, we will not need to pay the price. 
We will be long gone before the young people who starting out now, and who expect a pension plan when they grow old, will reap the benefits of what we sow today.  
Honourable senators on this side and honourable senators on the other side, I do not know why you would want to rush this bill. 
What is in it for you? 
What is in it for the Minister of Finance? 
 I would like to conclude by reiterating my sincere condolences to his Pina , his three children and his numerous relatives .
 . and his like I to his by his wife children to sincere conclude three relatives , my would reiterating numerous Pina
 like by sincere condolences three , Pina I to my would to his conclude . wife reiterating his and children numerous his
 I to children like his condolences three by his numerous and sincere conclude reiterating , his relatives to my would wife Pina
Pietro, we will miss you. 
 will , . we Pietro miss you
 miss , we you will . Pietro
 miss Pietro will . , we you
 we you . Pietro miss will ,
 will . miss we you , Pietro
 miss Pietro , . we will you
 we miss you will . , Pietro
 you , . miss Pietro we will
 Pietro you , miss will . we
 , . will miss we Pietro you
 Pietro . , we will you miss
 you . miss , we will Pietro
 we Pietro , . you will miss
 we , . Pietro will miss you
 we miss . will Pietro , you
 miss . you will we , Pietro
Honourable senators, there is constitutional law. 
Quebec wants to proceed by the rule of law. 
They are seeking to renovate their system under the rule of law and the Constitution.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
That is not my question.  
Senator Grafstein :
I assume that if they choose to proceed, they can. 
However, why should we in the Senate allow any province to proceed in a way that we consider unlawful? 
If there is an amendment to the Constitution, each senator in his or her heart and mind, after reviewing the testimony, must come to a conclusion. 
He or she can either vote for, against or abstain from the vote on the resolution.  
They want to be under the law, as does the Province of Newfoundland. 
They want to be under the Constitution. 
If they meet the standards of a constitutional change, I, for one, will support them, notwithstanding the fact that I mistrust their motivation and mistrust what they say. 
However, on matter of dealing with the rule of law, I am bound by the rule of law.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
My question has nothing to do with that answer. 
It was renewed in 1982 and given protection from the Charter. 
Quebec has finally adopted a linguistic school system that looks very promising and can be implemented without section 93 being amended, unlike Newfoundland, which needs an amendment to Term 17 to be able to implement a non-denominational system. 
The two resolutions are completely different in content and intent.  
Again, my question relates to the fact that the new linguistic school board process is well under way. 
 Pietro , we will you .
 , miss Pietro we . will
 . will Pietro , miss you
 Pietro will you . , we
Rest assured that this is just an au revoir. 
 just assured revoir . Rest au an that this is
 au this assured revoir an just Rest that . is
 Rest just that assured revoir . is au an this
 an that revoir assured is . Rest au this just
 that just an this assured Rest is au . revoir
 this . assured is just au Rest revoir that an
 just Rest is that . au this an assured revoir
 this that revoir . Rest is assured just au an
 assured Rest au an this . just that is revoir
 . this Rest revoir au is that just an assured
 . au an Rest assured revoir that this is just
 an au just assured is this revoir . that Rest
 is an . Rest au assured that this revoir just
 just that an revoir this . is Rest assured au
 assured Rest just . au this an revoir is that
 an that this assured . just Rest revoir is au
Can you imagine what kind of arm-twisting this will lead to? 
To collectivize an operation is to politicize it. 
That is what we are doing here, notwithstanding the precaution taken to maintain the board members' independence from the government. 
Even if we are told that they will come from outside the government and operate at arm's length from the government, we must be realistic.  
I would now like to address an important aspect of the bill, namely the impact of the plan on the two pillars of income security mentioned by Senator Kirby. 
The 25 or 30 per cent amounting to $22 billion a year goes to old age pensions. 
Every year, we save $80 billion, or 10 per cent of the gross national product, which goes to income security, including $22 billion from old age pensions, $23 billion from the Canada pension fund and $30 billion or $35 billion from private pension plans. 
Savings coming from private pension plans should remain stable in the future or else get smaller depending on the decisions we make. 
Contributions will increase by 70 per cent within five to seven years. 
I think the amounts will remain stable, but they could also drop, if this increase is not compensated by an equivalent decrease in income tax, for instance.  
As for RRSPs, they are likely to diminish if employment insurance contributions and taxes are not lowered.  
In my opinion, we will likely see a reduction in private savings, along with an increase in public savings. 
Is it a good thing to increase the role of the state? 
This is what is being done here. 
It implies that if it is in the public domain, the money will be better invested than if individuals invest their savings in the private sector. 
Who can possibly think that it makes sense?  
What happened in the past? 
Can it be said that the government was more cautious than individuals in the management of its funds? 
I am not blaming one government in particular, but the public sector's attitude is often like that. 
I simply note that this is the way things have been done for 40 years.  
 assured that this is just an au revoir .
 revoir is au that Rest just assured an this
 an this that au Rest revoir assured just .
 an assured that just au is . revoir Rest
Hon. Marisa Ferretti Barth :
 : Barth . Hon Ferretti Marisa
 Barth Hon Marisa : . Ferretti
 : . Ferretti Barth Marisa Hon
 Hon Barth : . Ferretti Marisa
 Barth Marisa : Hon Ferretti .
 Ferretti Hon Barth . Marisa :
 . Marisa Barth Hon Ferretti :
 Barth . : Ferretti Marisa Hon
 Barth Hon . : Marisa Ferretti
 Ferretti . : Marisa Barth Hon
 : . Barth Ferretti Marisa Hon
 Hon Ferretti Marisa . Barth :
 Ferretti Barth . Marisa Hon :
 Marisa Ferretti Hon : Barth .
 : Barth Marisa Ferretti Hon .
 Barth Marisa Hon . Ferretti :
I think I have explained some of the ideas we got from the government side. 
The liability of $600 billion becomes unfunded if we all quit paying CPP premiums, but the obligations still have to be met. 
That is what Reform was proposing through the election campaign and over the previous four years. 
They have changed. 
Now they want a smaller CPP.  
However, Preston Manning could never explain the first program. 
Now they have a CPP program which they wanted to explain to the minister in committee. 
Well, they could not get it together. 
Preston Manning, who made a promise to do it before committee meetings ended in the other place, failed to do it. 
I can see why.  
They are making false accusations in the House about people. 
It is the typical Reform program we have come to expect. 
They are off in left field somewhere, although I do not think they would want to be described that way.  
Now they want to create a super-RRSP, which does not make any sense because, not only is it at odds with what they said in committee and what they said in the election campaign, it does not fit into their tax plan. 
Remember, they have a tax plan with a flat tax. 
With the flat tax, you reduce the amount of exemptions. 
We are not getting any ideas from them.  
Now I will turn to the Liberals.  
Senator Gigantès :
Be careful.  
 . Marisa Ferretti Barth :
 Marisa . : Ferretti Hon
 Marisa . : Ferretti Barth
 Marisa Barth : Hon .
Honourable senators, I am both honoured and proud to speak for the first time in this house by paying tribute to the Honourable Pietro Rizzuto, whom I have known well for the past 30 years, from the time I began doing social and community work for the Italian community. 
 first this known community house for time 30 doing Rizzuto , paying am speak for social in and Pietro for time whom to and , work tribute by the , . senators the the honoured I Italian I past have to the Honourable I the years both began from Honourable well community proud
 , work social the by senators , the speak the . known in 30 both Honourable past for doing I years Pietro I I well Honourable from have time proud the for time the to , for community community whom tribute Italian honoured began am to Rizzuto first house paying and and this
 Rizzuto whom community proud and 30 this I for the work past Italian well the the years the to have for speak , social began Honourable and from paying known by in to first honoured . tribute I community senators for am doing , time both time Honourable the Pietro house , I
 and I the for . am in time Honourable the doing , and I began the for 30 paying well I senators , to the house by whom have for first from , proud years the tribute to community honoured time known social past Pietro community Rizzuto this Italian Honourable speak both work
 have senators for community the began proud , known 30 time paying work speak the Honourable from honoured whom am well this Italian and years , . in I the I for the I to both past Rizzuto for tribute time the to Honourable , and house social community doing by first Pietro
 , past first this Rizzuto whom by both , paying the have for the social the from I well in Italian community 30 I community for time time Honourable Honourable house and the to to Pietro for senators known honoured speak years , began . work tribute proud doing I and the am
 the have speak honoured tribute , , Honourable the am by Honourable first Pietro the house work proud time and paying , whom I to doing to I and past for in the the this from senators well community Italian Rizzuto 30 began time for I years known . both community for social
 the . Honourable by to for speak and for the paying the past Pietro for to began am this I from Honourable known , the I Rizzuto work both doing tribute community honoured time and social Italian , proud house I time first senators have community 30 in , well the whom years
 Honourable tribute time known from past and proud am have the Rizzuto I in years Pietro paying 30 to for the doing work community time for well by community , the began Italian social honoured I both this , whom senators speak the . for I house the to Honourable first , and
 in first the both work to community Rizzuto whom Honourable for for and , . by Italian Honourable , time social senators I the years , the to time past 30 known I began doing I speak the honoured for am proud paying this the from community have Pietro and tribute house well
 to the time I Honourable , , the work Rizzuto the first years community 30 past have to in and for social for Pietro , both senators am house . by well doing for community I and this began honoured from tribute Italian whom the the known paying time Honourable proud I speak
 Honourable this , work house began whom . for honoured senators well Italian to speak known social first I from Honourable 30 to I community Rizzuto the for doing past the by and time paying community Pietro proud am , I both time in for years tribute have , the the and the
 first began years and the the to , the past Honourable both known am proud and Pietro , from I I speak well Honourable for to time senators house , community the for . whom paying for time Rizzuto the social honoured I by community this in Italian work have doing 30 tribute
 I Honourable 30 time and social past Pietro in work senators I Rizzuto time speak both for years to Italian proud , the I paying well the am for for to . from began known by tribute community , community the this have first doing Honourable the and the honoured whom , house
 and time community . Honourable to known I the Honourable for I work for well 30 tribute past the this social , first honoured began have senators by I Pietro and both doing in am to speak whom the paying the house , years community , Rizzuto proud the for time Italian from
 doing Honourable years the work tribute known first to Rizzuto I I in senators Honourable to Italian social for time . honoured am , whom by paying proud have from house , the community community Pietro for and well speak the both the past the time for this 30 , I began and
At times, it appears the Supreme Court of Canada considers that the Constitution consists only of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 
Despite all the evidence - the stolen truck, the blood on the accused - the judges were only interested in one thing, and that was the arrest warrant. 
There was no warrant because the police acted on the spot when they had the accused, and I think they acted quite properly.  
Honourable senators, the Supreme Court ignored the rights of Mr. Boyle. 
Section 7 of the Charter indicates that Mr. Boyle had the right to life, privacy and security of the person, and those rights were not to be taken from him except by and in accordance with the principles of fundamental justice.  
I think the justices of the Supreme Court of Canada should be sent a message reminding them that the victim also had rights under the Charter.  
In all fairness, honourable senators, I must say that three of the justices dissented with the majority decision. 
They felt the police action had no bearing or outcome on the decision. 
The chief justice came down the middle and quoted the decision made by former chief justice Brian Dickson, which I understand finds that, if the subject is not spelled out in the Constitution, it is implied as being there. 
However, there again, that is merely my interpretation.  
I emphasize again that Mr. Boyle had the right to his life. 
He had the right to have a vehicle and operate it, and he had the right to have money in his possession. 
All those were taken away from him, and all the Supreme Court of Canada could think of was that piece of paper called a "warrant" and to criticize the police for not having such a document.  
I wanted to suggest that perhaps criminals should apply for a warrant before they commit murder, but I do not want to pursue that because I am afraid that some Charter judge will give them a warrant or a licence to do so. 
Fifteen years ago, I would have been shocked at criticism of a decision rendered by the Supreme Court; but, today that is commonplace. 
When a major decision comes down from the Supreme Court, the media is there to interview people who wish to comment, mostly negatively, on the decision. 
As I stated, we would not have seen a headline like that 15 years ago.  
That is their function, and Parliament has referred it to them. 
However, the enactment of laws remains the function of Parliament. 
It is not the function of the Supreme Court of Canada or any other court to make laws.  
 Honourable senators , am both honoured and proud to speak for the first time in this house by paying tribute to the Honourable Pietro Rizzuto , whom I have known well for the past 30 years , from the time I began doing social and community work for the Italian community .
 by I time to years the Honourable to work time Italian for . senators Pietro the Rizzuto the tribute for Honourable well and whom community both proud , I first 30 paying honoured , I doing and in community known from , for the am social have past this house speak the
 I first speak senators from Honourable the honoured I , social in began the this the tribute I for community past Italian by to the work time for years house , for Honourable whom . and Rizzuto and both to well known Pietro , community 30 time paying proud am doing have
 doing community time I I and social first past Pietro I paying Rizzuto this known , , years for the the for well whom work to both to and 30 house community the . for senators in Honourable speak began the Honourable am proud by honoured have time Italian the , tribute
I also feel a certain sadness.  
 also . feel a certain I sadness
 a I sadness . certain also feel
 certain I . a also feel sadness
 a also I . certain sadness feel
 a feel I certain also . sadness
 . sadness certain also feel a I
 a I feel certain also sadness .
 I . certain also sadness a feel
 sadness a . I also feel certain
 certain I . feel also sadness a
 sadness a I feel . certain also
 feel a sadness certain also I .
 sadness certain I feel . also a
 also sadness certain feel a . I
 feel also sadness a I certain .
 certain also a . I feel sadness
Who can possibly think that it makes sense?  
What happened in the past? 
Can it be said that the government was more cautious than individuals in the management of its funds? 
I am not blaming one government in particular, but the public sector's attitude is often like that. 
I simply note that this is the way things have been done for 40 years.  
Did the government display more shrewdness in the management of business investments? 
Look at the performance of crown corporations. 
Air Canada, CN and Canadair all did well after being privatized. 
In other words, good management started once the government was no longer involved.  
So, we should be cautious before giving the public sector increased responsibilities for the management of funds. 
We must be careful before transferring money from the private to the public sector.  
Let us now look at the impact of the plan on jobs.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Your 15 minutes are up. 
Is leave granted to continue, honourable senators?  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
Senator Bolduc :
Honourable senators, clearly, we will be increasing the cost of jobs for businesses, and the cost of work for individuals. 
How can another payroll tax be positive for the creation of jobs? 
 I feel a certain sadness .
 a . also feel I certain
 feel . I also a sadness
 a I . certain sadness also
I wish to offer my deepest sympathy to his wife, Pina, his children, Melina, Alfonso and Maria Cristina, and their partners, his grandchildren, all the members of his family and his many friends, and also my assurance that I will not forget him.  
 forget their to wife not will that deepest my all I . Maria his offer , his , I wish his partners of children friends assurance , , many sympathy Alfonso Melina his and him grandchildren family Cristina , , also Pina his members and and my , , the and to
 children partners , grandchildren assurance and and also Alfonso of , my , his , Maria , family his Pina offer to his his I Melina my will , Cristina to , I wish forget , friends his and that sympathy members their many not and all him deepest . wife the
 his their , the , , partners Maria members sympathy children friends and not I Pina my will my and his Cristina family grandchildren and , I wish to , forget that also , many offer wife assurance his all Melina to his deepest , of and his . Alfonso him ,
 my sympathy not Melina to family of , I , friends grandchildren , children many also his the and his wish , I all partners will his offer , Alfonso his Pina and Maria to him , my deepest wife their , and his that and Cristina , . forget members assurance
 , not and sympathy my my I his his friends , forget Alfonso and and all deepest assurance Maria , their , many Cristina I also Melina Pina that him of partners to children his wish family , the will wife , his his offer to grandchildren , , members . and
 sympathy , members to his wife their forget offer his Cristina , Melina wish and partners grandchildren Maria , family and many I him his deepest friends , , his , , . and to will not I the my also Alfonso and all , that Pina children my assurance his of
 his will , , his also grandchildren friends that , to family , of forget Pina their Cristina Alfonso to Maria deepest wife wish , the his , and assurance his Melina all I sympathy not members and , his and many my offer him partners children my I , . and
 children to my , , the wish his sympathy Alfonso their of members wife grandchildren to I his will my friends him I and many and forget . also deepest his family , assurance , offer Cristina his , and all Pina and , , his that Maria , Melina partners not
 family offer wish that Cristina , also , all I their not of Pina Melina , assurance partners the to his friends and I his forget Maria , members , my and grandchildren my his his , many , children and will his deepest wife . Alfonso sympathy to and , him
 family Pina , and their Maria wife to , I all , the . Alfonso members his friends not sympathy , partners , Melina his and his I grandchildren deepest his , forget and Cristina assurance , of many wish children my my that and also his , offer him will to
 Cristina , deepest all assurance that many wish I and Pina Maria his I partners wife , members and him grandchildren family their , , to , friends Melina will Alfonso sympathy , offer my , . his , and of his the his not his children and forget to also my
 to I not wife all family , of sympathy Alfonso wish and , Cristina their I his my Pina , members grandchildren and deepest , Maria Melina many partners offer children , , to his the him his and and his will , forget friends . my , assurance his that also
 to friends and deepest my his of assurance his his not and I , many , my him all also to their Maria . , family wife partners sympathy and , Pina Melina , , and , will that , I members his grandchildren Alfonso wish forget children the Cristina his offer
 and will his children , to that all my Pina their of and many , and his I , family not him offer , forget , my wife assurance Cristina also . I his deepest friends , his his partners members and the Maria Melina grandchildren to , wish sympathy Alfonso ,
 him Alfonso . friends , children to I , his , that offer and I wife , all Melina his also will his his my , , my and members Maria not his wish family , Pina deepest many forget their and and to of partners sympathy grandchildren Cristina , the assurance
 . , family the , I my members , I him his deepest wife to my his his their his , partners Melina Alfonso and , , sympathy offer also , to and , Pina not Maria assurance grandchildren of Cristina forget many and and all his friends will that wish children
In my opinion, we will likely see a reduction in private savings, along with an increase in public savings. 
Is it a good thing to increase the role of the state? 
This is what is being done here. 
It implies that if it is in the public domain, the money will be better invested than if individuals invest their savings in the private sector. 
Who can possibly think that it makes sense?  
What happened in the past? 
Can it be said that the government was more cautious than individuals in the management of its funds? 
I am not blaming one government in particular, but the public sector's attitude is often like that. 
I simply note that this is the way things have been done for 40 years.  
Did the government display more shrewdness in the management of business investments? 
Look at the performance of crown corporations. 
Air Canada, CN and Canadair all did well after being privatized. 
In other words, good management started once the government was no longer involved.  
So, we should be cautious before giving the public sector increased responsibilities for the management of funds. 
We must be careful before transferring money from the private to the public sector.  
Let us now look at the impact of the plan on jobs.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Your 15 minutes are up. 
Is leave granted to continue, honourable senators?  
Hon. Senators :
 I wish to offer my deepest sympathy to his wife , Pina his children , Melina , Alfonso and Maria Cristina , and their partners , his grandchildren , all the members of his family and his many friends , and also my assurance that I will not forget him .
 my my , grandchildren , offer children wife of his and not assurance will all forget . , that and his Cristina deepest I , his , Pina and and to , I Alfonso partners Maria his sympathy Melina their many members wish , him friends his family , the also
 their all that Cristina grandchildren his , will not many family assurance forget his . my and , Melina Maria my wife to Pina him the members , Alfonso of partners , to , his his I children his , offer , I and , wish deepest and and also sympathy
 sympathy and I his , my will Alfonso I , assurance Melina , Cristina my him his forget that Maria his not Pina grandchildren of partners his offer , , many also the members and children . to , his deepest and family their , wish and wife friends , to
We in Quebec's Italian-speaking community knew Pietro when he was among the workers and after when he sat in the Senate. 
 ' after knew Senate workers Italian . in We when speaking when he Pietro community sat Quebec among and in was - s the the he
 in he the . Senate among when Italian We ' the s and was sat Quebec workers after he Pietro when speaking knew in - community
 community the ' he speaking in Senate knew he We s after Quebec the among in workers and when - Italian when was Pietro . sat
 Italian he sat speaking Senate - among in when and . the was Pietro after the community ' when he knew Quebec in workers We s
 ' - was . Quebec sat s Senate when the speaking knew he he and when workers after Pietro in the in among Italian We community
 the speaking workers after We knew among when sat and . Pietro when ' Quebec he community was Italian the s in in Senate - he
 Quebec when Senate speaking and the after . ' was the workers Pietro in knew he in he We - Italian when sat among s community
 Italian s was he when in among knew and when after sat speaking the We ' . workers Quebec community he the Pietro Senate in -
 Italian when speaking knew when community the among ' - . We s sat Senate Pietro was he Quebec after the workers in he in and
 when he knew speaking community s - workers among Quebec ' the in and . Senate Pietro he in sat We the Italian was after when
 . when workers he Quebec in We Senate after - Italian sat s the Pietro in was speaking among ' the when he community and knew
 workers knew among was after s We Quebec when ' . and he - the in Italian he speaking when community the in sat Senate Pietro
 We and knew the when when he s speaking after community among Pietro Senate in he ' workers sat Italian was Quebec the . - in
 when after and sat . the when Quebec Senate - We in he Pietro speaking he workers ' the in community knew s among Italian was
 sat was Pietro when and he the he . Italian knew - when speaking in Quebec Senate ' among the in workers community We s after
 Quebec knew community - he in ' the Italian workers . after Pietro when sat in the when speaking s and among he was We Senate
As I stated, we would not have seen a headline like that 15 years ago.  
That is their function, and Parliament has referred it to them. 
However, the enactment of laws remains the function of Parliament. 
It is not the function of the Supreme Court of Canada or any other court to make laws.  
Honourable senators, I read in today's paper where the families of the Leslie Mahaffy and Kristen French, both of whom were killed by Paul Bernardo, are appealing to the judge to make a law prohibiting evidence of that type being heard by the public in court. 
The interesting point is that they are asking the judge to make the law; they are not asking Parliament. 
Parliament is the highest court in the land and that must always be so. 
It would be most unusual to have a lower court issue a directive to a higher court.  
Honourable senators, I commend Senator Cools for all the work and research she has done. 
Many aspects of her amendment are worthwhile considering. 
However, I feel she has omitted to take into consideration one aspect of our legislation.  
Any law passed by Parliament does not become law until it receives Royal Assent, and having the Supreme Court direct Parliament to pass a law by December 19, 1997 takes away the prerogative of the sovereign. 
That is why we have Royal Assent. 
We could have the ridiculous situation of one of the judges who ordered the enactment of this legislation by December 19 coming into this chamber and giving Royal Assent on behalf of the sovereign.  
Motion in Sub-Amendment 
Hon. Orville H. Phillips :
Therefore, I move: 
That the motion in amendment be amended by deleting the word "and" at the end of paragraph ( b ) and by adding the following after paragraph ( c ): 
( d ) the Court, by its Order of November 19, 1997 that Bill C-16 must be enacted by December 19, 1997, is impeding proceedings in Parliament and is subordinating the Senate of Canada; and 
( e ) the Court is usurping the royal prerogative of the Sovereign who, with the advice and consent of Parliament, keeps and upholds the Queen's Peace and the public peace and security of all.  
 We in Quebec ' s Italian - speaking community knew Pietro when he among the workers and after when he sat in the Senate .
 when Pietro in - . he Senate Italian after workers among We and sat community ' he when Quebec the was speaking in s the
 in when in speaking when after was the workers he the and Quebec s - knew . he Senate ' community Pietro among Italian sat
 - Pietro in community was . the speaking s among workers Italian in the when sat Quebec when and after he knew ' Senate he
Like them we are devastated by the sudden departure of the person everyone called simply "the senator." 
 person the the the ." by we of them are simply everyone sudden devastated called " Like senator departure
 the the called departure Like " are senator ." we sudden by the person devastated of simply them everyone
 simply " person are everyone the them senator by of ." devastated we the departure Like sudden the called
 called devastated person the simply of sudden ." " everyone are the senator by Like departure them we the
 of by senator Like simply sudden are we person called the the departure everyone ." the devastated them "
 simply person everyone by sudden are them devastated we departure the " the ." called of Like the senator
 senator sudden simply ." we everyone of the called are the departure Like the devastated person them " by
 simply everyone senator the Like the of by are " departure called person ." we devastated them sudden the
 departure ." person senator sudden " simply the them Like the the of called by devastated we are everyone
 senator the sudden called ." are the " person them everyone the of by we devastated Like departure simply
 devastated are we called them simply senator sudden departure ." person Like the of the the " everyone by
 the " person we ." devastated Like by are simply them of sudden the departure everyone the senator called
 Like everyone departure " the ." called of sudden we person the are simply them the by devastated senator
 ." devastated senator are of the called we Like everyone sudden them by departure " simply the the person
 are by simply departure we sudden called Like the person devastated senator " ." them the of everyone the
 person we simply the everyone are sudden " Like devastated by called senator of departure ." the the them
We have in Quebec two classes of English-speaking Quebecers.  
Quebec has been repeatedly criticized for this discrimination, and rightly so. 
How this undesirable situation developed can be traced to the then Minister of Justice, who is Prime Minister today.  
I will quote from his book, Straight from the Heart , where Mr. Chrétien describes how he was responsible for exempting Quebec from the crucial parts of section 23. 
He says: 
During the weeks that followed, I continued to try to overcome Quebec's objections, to the extent of modifying the principle of minority language education and agreeing to fiscal compensation when Quebec opted out of amendments that affected culture and education. 
That required a hell of a lot of selling to Trudeau, but he went along in the end, as did the nine other premiers, who were willing to reopen their sealed bargain in order to bring in Quebec. 
Mr. Chrétien goes on to say: 
I used to joke that these were the first constitutional amendments in history to have been negotiated over the telephone.  
Let it be noted that Mr. Chrétien takes pride of authorship - "of modifying the principle of minority education...". 
He boasts of getting the agreement of then Prime Minister Trudeau and the nine other premiers, and finds it amusing that this inexcusable abandonment of a fundamental principle was secured over the telephone.  
Honourable senators, Quebec's partial exemption from section 23 was initiated and approved by Mr. Chrétien by including the following in the Constitution Act, 1982: 
59(1) Paragraph 23(1)( a ) shall come into force in respect of Quebec on a day to be fixed by proclamation issued by the Queen or the Governor General under the Great Seal of Canada.  
(2) A proclamation under subsection (1) shall be issued only where authorized by the legislative assembly or government of Quebec. 
Section 23(1)( a ), from which Quebec is exempted by the authors of the Constitution Act themselves, requires that Canadian citizens: 
Finally, I want to comment on the notion of joint committees, particularly those charged with studying a particular item within a given period. 
It was said here, and repeated before the committee, that participation by the Senate must not be interpreted as an abandonment by it of the obligations imposed on the Senate in matters of constitutional amendments. 
It is true that, alone, we cannot defeat an amendment of this nature, as the Senate may be overruled by the House of Commons. 
However, as was shown in the case of the first Term 17 resolution, although the Senate impact on a constitutional amendment is limited, its efforts in this regard can be most constructive. 
I am convinced that if the amendments to it, which the Senate forwarded to the House, had been accepted, Parliament would not be faced with a second Term 17 resolution as it is now, as the Senate amendments satisfied the affected minorities while respecting the Government of Newfoundland's objectives.  
 Like them we devastated by the sudden departure of the person everyone called simply " the senator ."
 devastated ." of by " we Like senator the called everyone person are the them simply departure sudden
 by " everyone the the are sudden them devastated simply ." called the Like person departure senator of
 devastated simply everyone departure the senator them " Like are we sudden the ." the person called of
It will be with both respect and esteem that we remember this noble, generous, devoted, proud and endearing man, who will provide an example and inspiration for many. 
 example , esteem remember provide with endearing both we , will inspiration and , devoted many man . an who and respect will be and for , noble generous this It that proud
 inspiration that It remember and generous man we noble for respect provide proud both and this devoted . , who will , , example many esteem endearing be and , will with an
 respect generous inspiration , example provide with this . man who that endearing remember devoted an many , , and will , be It noble we proud and for esteem and will both
 will example , noble and , who both esteem provide and that respect many generous man will It proud an be for endearing devoted . with , we this , inspiration remember and
 we will many with It and this endearing and example who inspiration generous both be man , esteem proud will an that and for devoted respect , , provide noble , remember .
 will this man noble esteem for , we that and , . , , respect devoted and with proud many inspiration an remember both and It provide who be will generous example endearing
 both . , , we and It esteem this will will with noble who and an endearing proud that generous man for example devoted and , provide remember inspiration respect be , many
 remember , man who and with , , noble we and proud many an both devoted this respect . inspiration example endearing provide will , that esteem will and for It generous be
 will we generous noble for this provide . and will inspiration who example It man both with respect and , , , that devoted esteem be and many an proud , endearing remember
 . we respect , will an It for remember generous , that example will devoted and this esteem and man , inspiration proud with noble , and be both provide who endearing many
 will man inspiration endearing both generous devoted proud , , provide example an we . this respect with , many and will for , be that and remember It esteem noble who and
 that It and and man , both , example for esteem provide noble endearing many . with , remember generous will will be we respect an inspiration devoted proud this who and ,
 endearing proud esteem this and , be example . devoted an provide respect and It and man , with we will remember both , generous many for who will noble , inspiration that
 and man inspiration remember , , It and noble esteem an that . generous will , we provide , with proud both example be this for will respect many and who endearing devoted
 respect and for will be that esteem , proud and and . noble this we inspiration example , many , provide devoted with who both will remember generous , man an It endearing
 , endearing an inspiration for proud and who we generous that this many example , provide respect , devoted will and with both noble . , esteem and It will man be remember
Has the government developed a communications plan to inform Canadians of this issue prior to the passage of this bill? 
To that inquiry, Senator Graham replied, "Yes." 
He also said that this was a matter to which I had referred before, and that there are 1-800 lines available. 
He said that that was the communication plan on the part of the government.  
The crux of this whole taxation matter came about on November 26, when I asked the following question of the Leader of the Government in the Senate: 
On October 1 of this year, Senator Meighen asked a question concerning employment insurance. 
On October 23, I asked a further question, referring to my colleague's earlier question. 
I received a response yesterday to my question, and I wish to read it into the record. 
This concerns employment insurance and the reserve. 
It states: 
A reserve is necessary, since it makes it possible to apply more stable premium rates throughout the economic cycle, thus making it possible to avoid increasing them in a recessionary period. 
In addition, the reserve makes it possible to ensure there are sufficient funds to pay benefits when they are most necessary.  
What happened in the last recession was a $2 billion surplus in the Employment Insurance Account turned into a $6 billion deficit in two years, and it was necessary to increase premiums by 30% at what was already a difficult time for job creation. 
Consequently, the government believes that it is wise to establish a reserve in the Employment Insurance Account.  
I am assuming that since you have given me this response, that was indeed the strategy on the part of the government.  
I then went on to say: 
If I may, I will quote from The Financial Post of today, November 26, a 1997. 
An editorial entitled "EI surplus is a deficit-reduction tax" states clearly that the EI will result: 
...in an accumulated surplus suspected to top a scandalous $19 billion by the end of 1998. 
If you need $8 billion to look after a recession, using the last recession as the example, what kind of recession are you planning on?  
 It will be with both respect and esteem that we remember this noble , generous , devoted , and endearing man , who will provide an example and inspiration for many .
 generous noble , and be both that and devoted who , respect will . for will an man It we , example inspiration proud with this many , and provide remember endearing
 devoted an will who and for esteem inspiration endearing provide remember man and and , will be respect . , proud generous noble that with both It example we this many ,
 devoted It for both endearing . an will with that and and who be example proud will respect , , and remember we many this generous , noble , provide inspiration esteem
The Hon. the Speaker :
 Hon the The . Speaker :
 The Hon Speaker . : the
 . Hon the The Speaker :
 The the : Speaker Hon .
 The : Hon the . Speaker
 : Hon The . Speaker the
 : Hon . Speaker the The
 Speaker the : The Hon .
 Hon Speaker . : The the
 the The : . Hon Speaker
 . The Speaker Hon the :
 Hon : the Speaker . The
 . Speaker Hon the : The
 The : Hon Speaker . the
 The Hon : the Speaker .
 Hon the Speaker . The :
Telecommunications Act Teleglobe Canada Reorganization and Divestiture Act 
Bill to Amend-First Reading 
The Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C-17, to amend the Telecommunications Act and the Teleglobe Canada Reorganization and Divestiture Act. 
Bill read first time.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this bill be read the second time?  
On motion of Senator Carstairs, bill placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading on Thursday, December 11, 1997.  
Canada Marine Bill 
First Reading 
The Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C-9, for making the system of Canadian ports competitive, efficient and commercially oriented, providing for the establishing of port authorities and the divesting of certain harbours and ports, for the commercialization of the St. Lawrence Seaway and ferry services and other matters related to maritime trade and transport and amending the Pilotage Act and amending and repealing other Acts as a consequence.  
Bill read first time.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this bill be read the second time?  
On motion of Senator Carstairs, bill placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading on Thursday, December 11, 1997.  
Aboriginal Peoples 
Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples-Committee Authorized to Study Recommendations 
Hon. Charlie Watt , pursuant to notice of December 8, 1997, moved: 
That the Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal Peoples be authorized to examine and report upon the recommendations of the Royal Commission Report on Aboriginal Peoples (Sessional paper 2/35-508.) 
respecting Aboriginal governance and, in particular, seek the comments of Aboriginal peoples and of other interested parties on: 
2. the mechanisms of implementing such new structural relationships and; 
 The Hon the Speaker :
 : The Speaker . Hon
 Hon The Speaker the .
 Hon The : the .
Honourable senators, I would ask you to please rise in honour of the memory of our colleague and friend Pietro Rizzuto.  
 I ask memory honour and colleague in to friend our , you Rizzuto . the would rise senators please Honourable Pietro of of
 colleague . I you Honourable in please and Pietro memory senators would ask the of , friend honour of Rizzuto to rise our
 , . rise ask colleague Rizzuto of please of to would the friend Pietro memory Honourable I senators and in you honour our
 honour rise of . please to would in colleague , friend senators Rizzuto memory and I of Pietro you the Honourable our ask
 ask honour senators please friend , in and rise Pietro memory would colleague of of you I to Rizzuto our the . Honourable
 to would . Pietro our Honourable in friend memory I of ask Rizzuto senators and of rise the honour colleague , you please
 colleague to please friend . , ask I Rizzuto would you the memory Honourable in and of our Pietro senators of rise honour
 senators of please would . the colleague , Rizzuto ask Pietro rise in Honourable I to memory our friend honour of and you
 Honourable senators colleague friend . memory in Rizzuto ask and rise , of our of please Pietro honour I would the to you
 in Rizzuto , of friend honour would ask of senators our and Pietro rise I . colleague memory the you to please Honourable
 of would our rise of friend colleague please Honourable Pietro Rizzuto and senators ask in , I memory . to you honour the
 senators of Rizzuto of honour in Honourable to , the I our and you . memory friend please would ask colleague Pietro rise
 memory honour senators and would please ask in to , friend Rizzuto rise you . the of colleague Honourable Pietro of our I
 to please friend Rizzuto and I of Honourable rise colleague the Pietro honour our in ask memory , of would . senators you
 rise you in colleague memory honour Rizzuto our the . would of and Honourable Pietro ask friend of please to senators I ,
 you in and memory honour Pietro Honourable I Rizzuto of colleague ask of the . rise please would friend to senators our ,
QUESTION PERIOD 
Federal-Provincial Relations 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Province of Quebec-Request for Particulars 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Provinces-Effect on Atlantic Provinces 
Environment 
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Support by Provinces of Government Position taken at Kyoto-Request for Particulars 
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Target Year for Implementation of Government Position taken at Kyoto-Government Position 
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Informetrica Study on Meeting Targets-Government Position 
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Concept of Differing Targets-Government Position 
National Unity 
Recent Remarks of Prime Minister-Possible Conditions of Secession of Quebec-Government Position 
Immigration 
Tracking and Detention of Unsuccessful Refugee Claimants-Government Position 
Detention Facilities for Refugee Claimants-Request for Particulars 
Fisheries and Oceans 
Negotiations on Multilateral Agreement on Investment-Continuation of Limit on Foreign Ownership of Commercial Licences-Government Position 
National Defence 
Search and Rescue Helicopter Replacement Program-Possible Cabinet Discussion on Awarding Contract for Helicopter Purchase-Government Position 
Search and Rescue Helicopter Replacement Program-State of Sea King Helicopter Fleet-Government Position 
Federal-Provincial Relations 
 Honourable , I would ask you to please rise in honour of the memory of our colleague and friend Pietro Rizzuto .
 you of to rise Honourable I please the and in our honour ask , senators Pietro would Rizzuto . of colleague memory
 senators colleague memory and you our Honourable to rise , of would I the honour ask . in please Rizzuto of Pietro
 Honourable ask . friend Rizzuto of of I to would , in please colleague and senators you Pietro memory our rise the
Honourable senators then stood in a minute's silent tribute.  
 then senators s ' minute Honourable in . a stood tribute silent
 in a stood minute . ' then Honourable senators silent tribute s
 senators . ' silent s in stood minute a Honourable then tribute
 then a ' senators . minute silent s tribute in stood Honourable
 ' s silent then Honourable a in stood senators tribute . minute
 in . tribute a senators silent s minute Honourable then stood '
 then s stood a ' . minute tribute senators in silent Honourable
 stood Honourable tribute . senators minute ' in silent a s then
 then a Honourable silent tribute minute stood ' senators s . in
 ' s Honourable minute in . a senators tribute stood silent then
 ' senators stood . s then minute a tribute in Honourable silent
 senators then minute a ' . stood silent Honourable in s tribute
 stood . tribute ' s a Honourable in minute then senators silent
 s a ' senators tribute Honourable minute silent . stood in then
 minute a ' silent in s stood then senators tribute . Honourable
 s minute tribute silent in a . then Honourable senators ' stood
A History of the Vote in Canada is meant to be an educational resource and a reminder to Canadians of the significance of the right to vote. 
This is in keeping with Elections Canada's 1993 mandate to educate voters about the democratic right to vote.  
While this book will appeal to historians, political scientists, university and high school teachers and students, it is hoped that it will also reach those who may have difficulty exercising their right to vote.  
As parliamentarians, honourable senators, it is our role to help promote this book and educate our fellow citizens on their rights as voters.  
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
Report of Committee 
Hon. Ron Ghitter , Chair of the Standing Senate Committee on Energy, the Environment and Natural Resources, presented the following report: 
Tuesday, December 9, 1997 
The Standing Senate Committee on Energy, the Environment and Natural Resources has the honour to present its 
SECOND REPORT 
Respectfully submitted, 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this bill be read the third time?  
On motion of Senator Butts, bill placed on the Orders of the Day for third reading at the next sitting of the Senate.  
Income Tax Conventions Implementation Act, 1997 
Report of Committee 
Hon. Michael Kirby , Chairman of the Standing Senate Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce, presented the following report: 
Tuesday, December 9, 1997 
The Standing Senate Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce has the honour to present its 
SIXTH REPORT 
 Honourable senators then stood in a minute ' s tribute .
 silent stood s . then senators a ' in Honourable tribute
 silent minute Honourable senators stood . then s ' tribute in
 in a minute stood silent senators tribute s . ' then
The Honourable Guy Charbonneau, B.A., C.I.D., C.L.J. 
 . L Charbonneau I . D A . Guy The . J . Honourable B . , ., C C .,
 ., L Honourable . A , J . . Guy . Charbonneau ., D B . C The I . C
 Honourable C ., . ., . L D Guy B Charbonneau A I . , . C . J . The
 C L . ., . Charbonneau Honourable . The B ., A . , Guy D J I C . .
 . D B L . . J . C ., , Guy . Honourable I . C The ., A Charbonneau
 L Honourable A Guy ., . . C . I Charbonneau . B , . J . C D ., The
 J . Honourable Guy I Charbonneau . . C B . D ., L The . C A ., , .
 . B The Honourable ., Guy L . I D Charbonneau . A , ., . J . C . C
 Guy The Charbonneau ., C . D . . . Honourable ., , B J . A . L C I
 . ., I J Guy . . Honourable The . C . . Charbonneau L C , B ., D A
 C D . J C Honourable ., B . . L . A Guy ., The I . Charbonneau . ,
 ., . . C Honourable L The B A J C ., . Charbonneau Guy , . . . D I
 ., . . , . Guy . . J Charbonneau Honourable C The D ., C B A I . L
 , J I ., D Honourable Guy The . L . ., . . C . B A Charbonneau . C
 Honourable J . L . The D ., . . ., . C C A Guy Charbonneau B I . ,
 . . B I A Guy C . Honourable . C Charbonneau ., . The ., , J L D .
As inflation eats away at it and the numbers rise, that number remains the same. 
This goes against everything we have ever done on this program since its inception in 1966. 
It stays the same. 
In 10 or 15 years, that $3,500 will be worth $1,500, $1,000, $500, depending on what government does and what happens to inflation.  
Senator Taylor :
Elect the Liberals and it will be high!  
Senator Tkachuk :
If we elect the Liberals, inflation will be high? 
We already know that! 
Let me continue in that vein. 
Perhaps honourable senators opposite do not want to hear what Paul Martin will be doing, and the explaining that you will have to do back home in 10 or 15 years when your children ask you what you did about this bill. 
When they retire, their CPP benefits will be worth about what they put in, plus 2.5 per cent.  
I do not get it. 
I do not understand why we are being asked to do that to our children, so that those who are retiring today can receive full benefits and those who are retiring soon can get their benefits. 
I do not get it. 
I will try to explain it today, and - I hope I can convince you.  
The CPP is part of a larger program that Paul Martin is introducing. 
Everything involves reform. 
We will have a reform of the Old Age Security benefit, which is coming up after Christmas. 
It is important to get through this before Christmas so that we can consider changes in the cut-backs that will come due after Christmas. 
 The Honourable Guy Charbonneau , B A ., C . I . D ., C . L . J .
 ., I L C , The Guy B Honourable . A C . Charbonneau J . . . D .
 Honourable . . . C L D ., , I . C . The A B Guy J ., Charbonneau
 . . Honourable . C B . C Guy , A D ., I Charbonneau L . The J .,
Tributes on Retirement 
 Retirement Tributes on
 on Retirement Tributes
 on Retirement Tributes
 on Tributes Retirement
 Tributes Retirement on
 Tributes on Retirement
 Retirement on Tributes
 Retirement Tributes on
 on Tributes Retirement
 Tributes on Retirement
 Tributes Retirement on
 on Tributes Retirement
 Tributes Retirement on
 Tributes on Retirement
 Tributes on Retirement
 on Tributes Retirement
However, why should we in the Senate allow any province to proceed in a way that we consider unlawful? 
If there is an amendment to the Constitution, each senator in his or her heart and mind, after reviewing the testimony, must come to a conclusion. 
He or she can either vote for, against or abstain from the vote on the resolution.  
They want to be under the law, as does the Province of Newfoundland. 
They want to be under the Constitution. 
If they meet the standards of a constitutional change, I, for one, will support them, notwithstanding the fact that I mistrust their motivation and mistrust what they say. 
However, on matter of dealing with the rule of law, I am bound by the rule of law.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
My question has nothing to do with that answer. 
It was renewed in 1982 and given protection from the Charter. 
Quebec has finally adopted a linguistic school system that looks very promising and can be implemented without section 93 being amended, unlike Newfoundland, which needs an amendment to Term 17 to be able to implement a non-denominational system. 
The two resolutions are completely different in content and intent.  
Again, my question relates to the fact that the new linguistic school board process is well under way. 
There will be elections to the boards in June. 
What impact does the modification of section 93 or the non-modification of section 93 have on what is already under way?  
Senator Grafstein :
Again, honourable senators, there are two solitudes here. 
I believe that education, in pith and substance, is a provincial matter.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
That is not the question.  
 on Retirement
 Retirement Tributes
 Tributes Retirement
 on Retirement
Hon. John Lynch-Staunton (Leader of the Opposition) :
 Hon John ) the Lynch Leader ( . : - Staunton Opposition of
 ( John Lynch ) : Staunton of . the Hon - Opposition Leader
 Staunton : Lynch . of ) ( the - John Leader Hon Opposition
 of . Opposition Leader : ( - ) Staunton Lynch Hon the John
 Hon John Staunton Opposition . the - Leader ) Lynch ( of :
 the : Leader Opposition Hon Lynch of ( - Staunton . ) John
 Hon John the ) Staunton : Lynch Opposition . - of ( Leader
 Hon Opposition Lynch ( the ) Staunton John . - Leader of :
 Opposition Lynch ( . the - Hon ) Leader of Staunton : John
 the - . : of ) Leader Hon Staunton John ( Opposition Lynch
 Staunton Opposition Lynch - ( Hon the John ) of . : Leader
 Leader : Opposition John ) - of . Hon ( the Staunton Lynch
 John ) Opposition ( : Staunton of . - Lynch the Hon Leader
 - the Lynch ( Staunton Leader Hon Opposition : of John . )
 of ) John : Leader . Opposition Lynch - Hon Staunton the (
 Hon Staunton Lynch the : ) - of Leader John Opposition ( .
This concentration of power, this centralization will be unhealthy. 
This technocracy and its perverse effects make me nervous. 
I hope one day we will have nothing worse than Mr. Sorros' manoeuvres to criticize.  
The regulations governing investments and the behaviour of administrators have not been revealed. 
They are not ready. 
What guidelines will there be for administrators? 
A parliamentary review is therefore vital before their implementation.  
In concluding, I would say to the government that the preferable alternative to its bill would be to simply oblige everyone in the labour force in Canada to invest a percentage of their savings in funds under private management or let government assume its role by providing a safety net for those who could not set aside enough money for their old age.  
Here is an intelligent response to the challenge before us. 
However, and it is regrettable in this era of the welfare state, it seems to me that we prefer to make sweeping rules that apply to everyone in order to resolve the problem of a few.  
Hon. Philippe Deane Gigantès :
You talk with admiration of private investment management. 
How do you explain the disaster at Olympia & York, for example, under the management of Mr. Eyton, our colleague, and the fact that major players like Conrad Black closed Dominion Stores and took the money Dominion Stores employees had invested in a pension fund, a fund they never drew from? 
Are you telling us that the private sector will be more generous and wise than the Caisse de dépôt in Quebec? 
Senator Bolduc :
I did not say disasters did not happen in the private sector. 
Senator Gigantès :
It is not a big deal if you have $3 million, but it is if you lose $35,000 or $70,000 and this is all the money you have. 
It may not be a big deal for you, but it is for small investors.  
Senator Bolduc :
 Hon . Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) :
 ) the ( Staunton . : Lynch Opposition John of Hon -
 John Staunton Opposition . ) Leader Lynch : ( of - Hon
 the . : Staunton Leader - Hon Lynch ) of John Opposition
Honourable senators, having had the advantage of knowing Guy Charbonneau for a long time before becoming a member of this house, I freely admit that the words I wish to say in tribute to him are coloured highly by my deep feelings for him.  
 to member the deep time of Honourable highly admit words I are a having by feelings Guy , before this wish of a tribute him knowing advantage Charbonneau senators in house say my had for long the I becoming for that coloured him , freely . to
 , a coloured in words say Guy Honourable time of are that freely I house tribute by long wish for Charbonneau to him the . him this advantage member admit knowing to senators the highly of I deep becoming before my , had feelings having a for
 to time of my I advantage freely a wish had I admit long that house feelings say him knowing are for member words becoming senators him to the this tribute Guy by Charbonneau for of highly a in deep coloured before , , the Honourable . having
 are him time member that house Guy knowing for . the Honourable before of admit Charbonneau words , by to a becoming the freely to coloured , feelings a him senators in long advantage highly having this I for of deep my say had wish I tribute
 I , Guy my feelings Honourable senators for words in . deep a before that say him member to knowing of wish Charbonneau the had of by to this freely becoming highly admit house long time advantage coloured having tribute are him a I for , the
 becoming Honourable knowing Charbonneau I time before tribute long him my member words are him house deep that for advantage of for to . coloured having the highly , feelings of senators say Guy admit the , this a a to by freely had wish I in
 highly the freely time advantage tribute the that him him Charbonneau in this to becoming for wish house deep words coloured my . of before having senators I Guy of say are long feelings I , admit a had a by , Honourable member for knowing to
 to I of before house coloured time are words wish deep knowing becoming in for admit Honourable for of a him a the , feelings freely to say Charbonneau long by had the Guy advantage tribute I senators . my highly this that having him member ,
 in to him by words this my long . had for a a having , time for of Honourable admit Guy the wish member highly the that freely , senators knowing becoming feelings deep of him Charbonneau I tribute I advantage house say coloured are before to
 him long a the that before wish the feelings Honourable , by him to member I , had having becoming Guy advantage knowing . highly in are this admit house of for deep say Charbonneau freely time of words coloured a to I for senators tribute my
 to the words of I my feelings this a . before him long had Honourable knowing of , a becoming advantage in time that tribute by admit , him for say to house are I Charbonneau the senators Guy deep freely highly for coloured wish member having
 this him freely of my the for highly . a to tribute him long say house for had before knowing senators I feelings advantage Honourable coloured admit having member that Charbonneau , Guy , wish becoming in to of deep words a I time the by are
 I I member for before deep the time , admit of him of a that senators my highly the wish words him house a coloured Charbonneau to for by Guy long , had advantage are becoming this knowing . say Honourable tribute having freely in feelings to
 feelings tribute house by this . member deep Honourable I say the that had Charbonneau him , the words a to admit to coloured my freely for long becoming of I of before are in senators Guy him highly having , knowing wish time for advantage a
 I deep advantage the of are to by a long senators that in highly words of admit knowing freely him time I my before wish a say for Charbonneau Honourable to the for coloured member . had , tribute house this Guy feelings , him becoming having
 in the tribute the senators by him , , him time long advantage that are say words of having Honourable wish a Guy to had Charbonneau this for for of member I to coloured I house admit deep . a before feelings my freely highly becoming knowing
What guidelines will there be for administrators? 
A parliamentary review is therefore vital before their implementation.  
In concluding, I would say to the government that the preferable alternative to its bill would be to simply oblige everyone in the labour force in Canada to invest a percentage of their savings in funds under private management or let government assume its role by providing a safety net for those who could not set aside enough money for their old age.  
Here is an intelligent response to the challenge before us. 
However, and it is regrettable in this era of the welfare state, it seems to me that we prefer to make sweeping rules that apply to everyone in order to resolve the problem of a few.  
Hon. Philippe Deane Gigantès :
You talk with admiration of private investment management. 
How do you explain the disaster at Olympia & York, for example, under the management of Mr. Eyton, our colleague, and the fact that major players like Conrad Black closed Dominion Stores and took the money Dominion Stores employees had invested in a pension fund, a fund they never drew from? 
Are you telling us that the private sector will be more generous and wise than the Caisse de dépôt in Quebec? 
Senator Bolduc :
I did not say disasters did not happen in the private sector. 
Senator Gigantès :
It is not a big deal if you have $3 million, but it is if you lose $35,000 or $70,000 and this is all the money you have. 
It may not be a big deal for you, but it is for small investors.  
Senator Bolduc :
Honourable senators, I never said there would not be any damage in the private sector. 
Some damage is done every day. 
But it is the private sector. 
What you are doing with this bill is giving enormous powers to a few people with money belonging to all Canadians, particularly the poor. 
It is serious because we do not know how long this will last. 
 Honourable senators , had the advantage of knowing Guy Charbonneau for a long time before becoming a member of this house , I freely admit that the words I wish to say in tribute to him are coloured highly by my deep feelings for him .
 him member feelings freely a that highly the tribute having long are for Guy knowing deep say , to house advantage . Honourable a wish him senators I time admit for had of by , becoming of Charbonneau before this I my coloured the to words
 for knowing of long by the Honourable this feelings I admit are to having I the . , words freely for a had to him say my time of wish Guy advantage in Charbonneau a becoming before deep member , that house senators highly him tribute
 a feelings advantage Honourable I by , my Guy for him long are deep Charbonneau words this to I him member in knowing tribute time the senators to of for coloured . the having a freely had of before , admit wish that house say becoming
Whether one was there or not, all would prefer to forget the disgraceful scenes which marked this chamber in the fall of 1990. 
 chamber one prefer or fall which . was in there all scenes marked the forget would to this 1990 of disgraceful the Whether not ,
 Whether disgraceful forget would which there in prefer one 1990 scenes . the , marked of this chamber to the was not fall or all
 marked the chamber fall prefer all not was there . would , disgraceful or this 1990 scenes Whether of to forget the in one which
 the all 1990 . forget was disgraceful this not fall there would or , in the which marked Whether one chamber prefer to of scenes
 to in there . not would Whether , this of prefer marked which was all 1990 forget disgraceful the one or fall scenes chamber the
 to all or , the 1990 fall disgraceful was marked forget there scenes Whether chamber of in which . one this not prefer would the
 . marked in one chamber or the fall 1990 forget was , not of disgraceful would which this prefer Whether all the scenes to there
 in all 1990 not prefer the fall Whether or which scenes of marked one the this to chamber , . there would was disgraceful forget
 chamber scenes of prefer was marked in Whether which one , . fall or this there not 1990 the would disgraceful forget all the to
 disgraceful Whether was fall , 1990 not or to of which one in there the . the would this forget prefer marked all scenes chamber
 . chamber or scenes which not , all prefer 1990 was the fall of there this Whether in one would the to marked forget disgraceful
 which forget this 1990 one marked chamber prefer of in all , to there disgraceful fall or not would the Whether was the scenes .
 would disgraceful this marked of 1990 in the all the not scenes forget prefer was there chamber . , Whether one to or which fall
 would one to chamber which there in disgraceful this fall the all or not was scenes . 1990 the marked Whether , of prefer forget
 to 1990 chamber Whether disgraceful which all or forget was fall one there , prefer in . not of the marked scenes this would the
 scenes disgraceful to marked which chamber this forget fall not in or , was . all 1990 one there of Whether the the would prefer
In the early 1980s, when a Canadian constitution was being debated, section 93 remained as it was written in 1867, despite the fact that Canadian society had evolved to the point where the debate we are now having should have been held then. 
Even more to the point, the authors of the Constitution Act recognized that section 93's limitations to two privileged Christian beliefs would conflict with the Charter's anti-discrimination implications, so much so that section 93 was provided immunity from the Charter in section 29. 
Indeed, section 29 could not be clearer. 
It reads as follows: 
Nothing in this Charter abrogates or derogates from any rights or privileges guaranteed by or under the Constitution of Canada in respect of denominational, separate or dissentient schools.  
Why the issue of confessional schools as well as other issues crying out for change, such as Senate reform, were left untouched during the long debate before and during patriation and surrounding the Constitution Act itself is for those who were there at the time to explain. 
Certainly a golden opportunity was lost to give Canada a basic law more in tune with modern Canadian society, except for the adoption of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 
Even it is not without its flaws, not the least being the notwithstanding clause which can be subjected to abuse. 
Perhaps all of this is a reflection of the one constant which has marked Canada since its origins, a country identified by its extraordinary political and social diversity and contradictions.  
In any event, we are faced with a request from the Quebec National Assembly to be removed from the obligations to maintain formal Catholic and Protestant school structures in the cities of Montreal and Quebec City and to maintain minority or dissentient Catholic and Protestant schools outside those areas at the request of minority Catholic or Protestant parents, as the case may be. 
Provincial legislation to establish linguistic schools is already being put into effect. 
These can be established without amending section 93. 
Quebec, however, points out that to have multiple school systems can only lead to overlapping, duplication, and confusion, with all their attendant additional costs.  
In addition, religious education as provided for in section 93 is reconfirmed in the province's Education Act, which by itself may be reassuring at first glance, but not in reality as it is a protection which is simply not as iron-clad as a constitutional guarantee.  
When the Education Act, Bill 107, was passed in 1994, the National Assembly agreed to apply the notwithstanding clause so that the privileges given to denominations in section 93 could not be successfully challenged under the Charter. 
Notwithstanding clauses expire every five years and this one is up in 1999. Will it be re-enacted? 
The Parti Québécois, in opposition, voted against it at the time. 
The two ministers who appeared before the joint committee would not reveal their party's position, preferring to await a broad consultation before stating it. 
An uninformed guess, however, leads me to believe that, if the Parti Québécois still forms the government two years hence, the notwithstanding clause will not be renewed, thereby leading to the gradual removal of Catholic and Protestant teaching in public schools as we know it today.  
In rebuttal to this, many will point to a letter sent to the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs by the Bishop of Baie-Comeau on behalf of the Assembly of Quebec Bishops. 
 Whether one was there or not , all would prefer to forget the disgraceful scenes marked this chamber in the fall of 1990 .
 all 1990 the chamber would there scenes one or was the this , marked . which of Whether in prefer disgraceful fall to not
 this which in or scenes the forget not one the 1990 all , chamber fall disgraceful prefer of would . there to was marked
 this . , Whether all 1990 or there chamber the to in prefer one forget which would scenes fall not was the disgraceful marked
When memories of it finally fade into vagueness, it will eventually, I hope, become but an unfortunate footnote in the history of the Canadian Parliament, except for one element which will never be forgotten. 
 be , vagueness When never finally become . I an it , element in of for into it will one history unfortunate forgotten the eventually hope the footnote Canadian , fade memories Parliament but of , which will except
 finally memories the which When footnote of Canadian , I never except into will vagueness it , forgotten hope . element of Parliament one the , unfortunate it for eventually will become but an in , fade history be
 footnote never I which history hope Canadian except finally Parliament unfortunate eventually be , in . , forgotten , When , of memories element into become will vagueness one fade but the an it of the will for it
 the except , of hope in will of fade , history be become for which forgotten eventually Canadian unfortunate footnote , but it never vagueness one When an , into will finally it memories . element I the Parliament
 it the element Parliament of except , the footnote I . finally but will in eventually which hope , of into will unfortunate memories Canadian for it vagueness forgotten When never an history be become , fade one ,
 memories into eventually , but of never When except become . vagueness it of , it history Canadian fade which footnote Parliament hope , in element , for the I will will unfortunate forgotten one an be finally the
 hope of one but history in will Canadian element unfortunate eventually vagueness of become for , finally fade will be the the forgotten , . When which it into I , except it memories Parliament , an never footnote
 an but never Parliament . except element memories it hope footnote be eventually history into become will one Canadian , of the , forgotten of , will fade , which I it When in the for finally unfortunate vagueness
 except When history eventually become , but unfortunate into memories one be an hope element will the it of it for vagueness I Parliament fade which , Canadian finally , of in . never the , footnote forgotten will
 will the element forgotten When memories the hope fade , finally into footnote an in eventually be , become , I but except will never Parliament which history of . one , it for it vagueness Canadian of unfortunate
 , for the When Parliament , but memories become never will one , I . vagueness in an it of be , unfortunate fade except forgotten footnote history Canadian the eventually hope finally element into will of it which
 an for history it Parliament forgotten eventually memories Canadian , vagueness of one I . never unfortunate except will hope but When become the be will the , , fade which into of footnote in it finally , element
 memories eventually vagueness When hope it element , never footnote of finally one , in will of , become history unfortunate Canadian , an will the into it which but . fade except for Parliament the be I forgotten
 element never the of , finally will in vagueness for , . fade it one unfortunate except which I of , memories eventually forgotten footnote the an but into hope be , When history Parliament will become it Canadian
 When it unfortunate element . , the Parliament , forgotten but which hope eventually except for fade one never of into history , memories vagueness the footnote an I become will be of finally , in it Canadian will
 footnote the an . eventually will into Parliament be it for in Canadian , which history unfortunate but forgotten will the except one memories When become finally vagueness hope it never fade of , element I of , ,
As a result, when the bill comes to us for consideration, all hell breaks loose.  
I do not think Canadians are aware of what is taking place in this place today, or what will happen as a result of passage of this bill. 
It will have a multiplier effect. 
Not only are we dealing with the Canada Pension Plan, but we are also dealing with the modernization of the other parts of the retirement structure, the Guaranteed Income Supplement and the Old Age Security. 
When you put all of that together, over time, Canadians, and particularly our youth, will say that enough is enough. 
You cannot have high EI premiums or high taxation through high EI premiums to pay your deficit down; then jack up your rates on the Canada Pension Plan; and then modify the OAS and GIS such that people receive reduced payouts, because you are hitting the same generation. 
You have bought off the seniors, and you are hitting the kids. 
They will not forget that.  
On October 30, Senator Tkachuk asked the following: 
Why is the government trying to fix the CPP by hitting hardest those least able to afford it?...  
Could the Leader of the Government in the Senate prevail upon his colleague the Minister of Finance to have his officials produce information showing the impact of the freeze in the earnings exemption for different ranges of income?  
For example, could data be prepared showing how much the freeze will benefit the government from those earning income below the poverty line relative to their family income, and how much it will save those with incomes above the poverty line relative to their total income?  
In other words, it is and will be perceived as another tax.  
On November 5, Senator Oliver said: 
They are increasing it by one month per year to give people time to adjust to the new reality of that retirement age. 
In effect, that will keep things in relative control.  
It should have been explained to Canadians that the government explored that method and rejected it for specific reasons. 
As others have said before me, people are living longer. 
While the age of 65 was formerly not achieved by many, it is being achieved by most today. 
That should be taken into consideration as a basis for increasing the age for retirement because it will decrease the burden on the young people who today believe that they will have to pay the whole shot for us.  
 When memories of it finally fade into vagueness , it will eventually , I hope , become but an unfortunate footnote in the history of the Canadian Parliament , except for one element which will be forgotten .
 history of vagueness the for When except but will fade which it never . an footnote eventually become , in Parliament memories will be hope finally , Canadian it into the , forgotten I of unfortunate one ,
 , never element it except it of will the , . the but history I , hope of eventually , When will in finally be an footnote which vagueness Canadian for become unfortunate one into memories Parliament forgotten
 it of the memories will , one . When footnote I element history of Parliament in but become the never Canadian forgotten eventually which will finally into unfortunate for , it an , hope , be fade except
Through it all he stood taller than those heaping abuse on him, never flinching, never replying in kind.  
 those , on . him never he than in replying Through all taller flinching heaping kind never stood it , abuse
 he never heaping kind Through stood in all , . flinching never , than replying him taller those on abuse it
 all Through , than heaping , replying taller flinching never abuse it in stood him on kind he never . those
 it flinching never abuse on all . he heaping replying kind taller stood , those than Through him , in never
 taller , Through on it . in stood abuse replying flinching heaping , those kind all never than never he him
 in . Through heaping those taller , stood never never him flinching all he on kind it replying , than abuse
 him heaping abuse it , replying taller on flinching Through , than . he never those stood all kind in never
 never than in he , abuse flinching it heaping never him Through taller all . on stood those kind replying ,
 Through kind he on than replying taller it . him in abuse never stood flinching , heaping never , those all
 abuse all never him replying in , it . on kind than , never flinching those Through heaping taller he stood
 he heaping . replying never than kind , stood in all taller , flinching abuse never him it on Through those
 flinching Through replying than kind in he never stood , on all those , it heaping him abuse taller . never
 Through taller abuse . heaping stood him kind than , those flinching it replying never on all in , never he
 him Through never , those . it flinching on heaping , in than taller kind never stood he replying all abuse
 Through than in him . abuse , never all replying stood taller heaping never those it kind on , flinching he
 in heaping replying abuse flinching , taller never all stood him . , never he Through kind it on those than
The amendments proposed to Article 93 by the Quebec government, which would remove the obligation for the Quebec government to have confessional school boards, seems reasonable to us and in keeping with traditional positions enunciated by the Anglican church.  
Honourable senators, the senior representatives of the mainstream Roman Catholic and Protestant groups did not register their opposition to these changes. 
This does not mean that this exercise was one of perfection. 
Indeed, many of us remain unhappy and regret the federal government's position taken with 23(1)( a ) then and now. 
I share, with Senator Pitfield and others, concern in that respect. 
However, unfortunately, I have a memory, and I recall very well that the 1982 Constitution, for which Senator Pitfield was a senior federal advisor, was a minimalist not a maximalist document. 
It was Senator Pitfield and others in power at the time who determined that, in order to pass the 1982 Constitution, the Province of Quebec should be given the option of proclaiming section 23(1)( a ) and that the notwithstanding clause would be incorporated in the 1982 Constitution to eviscerate the charter, both serious sources of our current distress.  
Many of us objected strenuously then, and do now, to giving the Province of Quebec these options. 
However, that is history. 
Many of us objected to the notwithstanding clause pressed by the other provinces, particularly Manitoba. 
Senator Pitfield was there. 
He understood that. 
This I remember.  
However flawed the 1982 Constitution was with regard to these two aspects, the special joint committee shared a defining moment. 
For the first time since 1982, two ministers from the Province of Quebec have appeared before a special joint committee of Parliament in Ottawa and have, in public hearings, given de facto and de jure recognition to the 1982 Constitution. 
Pluralism and the new demographics was the dialectic that we heard emanating from the Bloc members. 
They talked about pluralism - for the very first time. 
Surely, with patience, good ideas can have great roots and can grow great and mighty trees.  
However, members of the Reform Party, who proclaim equality across the land as a benchmark of their political theology, could not see their way fit to resolve the inequality as presented by section 93 when the opportunity presented itself.  
Honourable senators, I fully support the report and the federal resolution. 
 Through it all he stood taller than heaping abuse on him , never flinching , never replying in kind .
 him he heaping stood in than abuse never on it never . , , all Through replying taller those flinching
 , on he him stood abuse flinching never Through kind all in taller heaping than never it replying . those
 stood all abuse flinching Through never replying , heaping never him kind in than he , taller it those .
This is not an apology for Senator Charbonneau's decisions but a vivid illustration of the great courage which has always exemplified his life - courage coupled with great distinction. 
 illustration Senator s which courage ' great but apology courage a . vivid Charbonneau coupled great of has This always decisions - with the for life exemplified his distinction an not is
 great ' vivid has which exemplified illustration apology decisions his not This great a distinction an always courage coupled but . courage - is life with the for of Charbonneau Senator s
 Charbonneau vivid with illustration distinction but courage not for decisions This an s - always great has the courage ' which life exemplified his apology great . a coupled Senator is of
 of courage vivid Charbonneau s - This has his an life not apology is but a great courage . always decisions with which the coupled ' distinction for great exemplified illustration Senator
 s of ' which distinction has vivid coupled apology Charbonneau illustration courage not for is always - a Senator . an great courage great the exemplified decisions life This but his with
 Charbonneau coupled great s with not great is has life apology ' - of vivid but which illustration courage an for always distinction a courage decisions . Senator the his This exemplified
 great courage coupled is s an decisions exemplified vivid his but - This life distinction the which Charbonneau illustration with apology Senator for always of ' a great has not . courage
 ' great Senator an courage - . courage life has his the distinction always of s which This a exemplified great for is coupled decisions apology Charbonneau vivid illustration but not with
 coupled not This his life the Senator decisions illustration ' is an with great of has for exemplified distinction Charbonneau always - courage but which courage a vivid apology . s great
 an illustration Charbonneau which a exemplified s courage - distinction . vivid his but for of great courage great the ' not with This coupled is decisions apology life Senator always has
 life which illustration vivid but courage a of Charbonneau This great s courage great apology Senator with always distinction for . has not the exemplified is decisions his an - ' coupled
 courage not - great distinction decisions of has great . always the an which ' with illustration exemplified his This for but is s courage life apology coupled Charbonneau vivid Senator a
 coupled is always of courage a distinction decisions exemplified ' courage s with . the life but an Senator apology not has his which vivid illustration for This great great - Charbonneau
 great decisions his exemplified Charbonneau courage - vivid courage illustration This s an which . ' for distinction is the but has of always Senator life great a apology not with coupled
 Charbonneau illustration great courage This of a with apology always ' coupled decisions . the great an but which - vivid is distinction courage exemplified life s Senator for not his has
 exemplified an the for has This ' s which courage great his illustration a Charbonneau with courage is decisions coupled apology always . life of - but Senator great vivid distinction not
Telecommunications Act Teleglobe Canada Reorganization and Divestiture Act 
Bill to Amend-First Reading 
The Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C-17, to amend the Telecommunications Act and the Teleglobe Canada Reorganization and Divestiture Act. 
Bill read first time.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this bill be read the second time?  
On motion of Senator Carstairs, bill placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading on Thursday, December 11, 1997.  
Canada Marine Bill 
First Reading 
The Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C-9, for making the system of Canadian ports competitive, efficient and commercially oriented, providing for the establishing of port authorities and the divesting of certain harbours and ports, for the commercialization of the St. Lawrence Seaway and ferry services and other matters related to maritime trade and transport and amending the Pilotage Act and amending and repealing other Acts as a consequence.  
Bill read first time.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this bill be read the second time?  
On motion of Senator Carstairs, bill placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading on Thursday, December 11, 1997.  
Aboriginal Peoples 
Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples-Committee Authorized to Study Recommendations 
Hon. Charlie Watt , pursuant to notice of December 8, 1997, moved: 
That the Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal Peoples be authorized to examine and report upon the recommendations of the Royal Commission Report on Aboriginal Peoples (Sessional paper 2/35-508.) 
respecting Aboriginal governance and, in particular, seek the comments of Aboriginal peoples and of other interested parties on: 
2. the mechanisms of implementing such new structural relationships and; 
 This is not an apology Senator Charbonneau ' s decisions but a vivid illustration of the great courage which has always exemplified his life - courage coupled with great distinction .
 illustration the but decisions which - not Senator ' Charbonneau a exemplified his courage courage is This . life apology with great always for s has an great vivid distinction of
 has an Senator illustration decisions great courage exemplified a ' for coupled - courage distinction but Charbonneau always great apology . his is not s vivid This the of with life
 ' is for . not courage which an but always great his great of decisions life s coupled illustration has a This Senator distinction with the courage vivid exemplified Charbonneau -
This should have come as no surprise to those familiar with the bravery he demonstrated while on active service in Europe during World War II.  
 during demonstrated come should no he as in on those to with surprise while Europe familiar World active . service bravery the War II have This
 demonstrated War active surprise should . II on This while Europe to with service no as during come he familiar have World the bravery those in
 surprise have he demonstrated II should service with active as come bravery during the . in World This Europe those War to on familiar while no
 familiar bravery War Europe on as he come active . service This while the demonstrated during no have those to World should in II surprise with
 while those should Europe active World service come War with surprise during bravery have This II to on the he no . demonstrated familiar as in
 should those bravery familiar service with . no demonstrated as on active War the surprise come II while to have in Europe This he during World
 the as with on to should World come active in no familiar War surprise demonstrated . during he have those II This service while Europe bravery
 . demonstrated as familiar should in surprise with he on to service Europe come while World War II bravery active have during those This no the
 while to demonstrated This service during on World surprise active Europe in no II . those with should as War familiar come bravery he the have
 no . This War during have he on come demonstrated those to as bravery II Europe active in with service surprise while World should familiar the
 he bravery have should Europe service active familiar come to War as World surprise while those . in the no demonstrated with during This on II
 with familiar those he demonstrated War Europe World while service as have the . should II on in This surprise bravery no during to come active
 in those while service This demonstrated on familiar the surprise Europe II active come have to bravery should with World during as War no he .
 Europe no he active come in bravery service II with while should have during demonstrated the . on familiar This as to those War World surprise
 the to have II . in surprise on World demonstrated while Europe should he with come War active as those familiar service no bravery This during
 while service he should World the active This . surprise those no demonstrated in with as to come have bravery War during familiar on II Europe
We tried to get it done in 1986.  
Senator Gigantès :
And you failed. 
You could not do it.  
Senator Tkachuk :
Because the Liberals would not agree. 
I will defend my government, and my honourable friend will defend his.  
I will not delve too far into the OAS because there are other speakers who wish to deal with this issue over the next two weeks. 
Perhaps we, as senators, will be able to discuss this matter well into the new year, which I hope we do.  
Senator Gigantès :
You are reading from the wrong script.  
Senator Taylor :
It is obvious that my honourable friend does not have any notes.  
Senator Tkachuk :
I think I am getting to honourable senators opposite.  
I was told by the Honourable Senator Kirby that members opposite would only have one speaker on this issue. 
I have a feeling that we may hear from a few more senators after I and other senators point out some of the weaknesses in Bill C-2.  
Honourable senators, I would reiterate that this is not a pension program: this is a payroll tax! 
In the past, it harboured cheap loans for provinces, and it will harbour a $100-billion fund that will grow to a $1-trillion fund. 
Honourable senators, we will not need to pay the price. 
 This should have come as no surprise to those familiar with the bravery he demonstrated while on active service in Europe World War II .
 . should while bravery the familiar World to This with in he Europe II during active War no as demonstrated on service surprise have those
 with as in II during active . have War on service World surprise demonstrated This familiar no to should Europe come the he bravery while
 as surprise II should to . demonstrated in come with those War the World no service while during active bravery familiar have This Europe on
He has been a successful businessman and an invaluable supporter of the Conservative Party in Quebec, whose fortunes more often than not are about on the same level as those of the Liberal Party in Alberta.  
 a Quebec has supporter Alberta about on the successful are not Liberal Party been Party those of more as than fortunes the invaluable often businessman in . , He an and same in of level whose the Conservative
 of an on in not in fortunes Conservative the same and the Party successful has Party are than been of a more as Alberta . businessman the about Liberal invaluable those Quebec , often supporter level whose He
 fortunes been more not in of in Party on invaluable He supporter often as of the businessman level a Conservative are those than Liberal whose has Party Alberta , same . successful the about Quebec and an the
 an same Conservative the in Party has Liberal Quebec of a level been as on Alberta successful businessman Party those invaluable are not and in about fortunes often than the . the of , whose He supporter more
 successful supporter businessman level Liberal on of and Quebec Party about fortunes than . invaluable of whose the been the same in the He a those Alberta in , Conservative not Party often an as more are has
 an of often Party in Party as same the and Quebec are Conservative fortunes those in of has the not the about whose businessman supporter Alberta level been , Liberal than . a successful He invaluable on more
 whose often and in same more of the Party the an supporter Quebec invaluable are Liberal of has successful about businessman in Party level fortunes not Conservative a those . on , the been than Alberta as He
 are the about an of not He Conservative successful fortunes whose more level on , in same than as of a Alberta those Party in been supporter invaluable Liberal Quebec has businessman the . and often Party the
 fortunes invaluable of Conservative whose on of , often about the are successful in a Liberal businessman as than Quebec an the supporter not He the been and Alberta those in more . Party Party same has level
 and on has , Conservative in those than level Quebec the not Liberal of . the supporter an of invaluable Party same Party successful fortunes about as the businessman a whose often He are in more Alberta been
 Conservative has and in about Alberta the businessman in successful the . than an same on , invaluable are a of whose supporter level Party He Party more fortunes Quebec often been as of not Liberal those the
 Party same He supporter on an of often and more about of Quebec been the fortunes successful in whose , Party Conservative not than in Liberal those a businessman has Alberta the the are . level invaluable as
 whose of are successful of the those the He not has than more Alberta in a supporter invaluable been Conservative in as , Party level and about the . same an often fortunes Quebec on Party businessman Liberal
 supporter . about often Quebec businessman of than an not , been level Liberal has Alberta Conservative whose same are the fortunes Party and a in on more the invaluable successful those the in Party He of as
 supporter the than the a fortunes Liberal businessman . He Alberta about of more same as in and Party those Quebec of the been level Party Conservative often invaluable whose on has in not successful are , an
 fortunes Conservative as . than has successful whose He of in of Alberta about on Party Liberal level invaluable not the been and an , the often businessman Party a more supporter are the those Quebec same in
Under the evidence presented to us - not outside the room, but before us - that was clear. 
In that respect, I support the report and the resolution.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
It was moved by the Honourable Senator Pépin, seconded by the Honourable Senator Lucier, that this report be adopted.  
Is it your pleasure, honourable senators, to adopt the motion?  
Motion agreed to and report adopted, on division.  
Quebec 
Linguistic School Boards-Motion to Amend Section 93 of Constitution-Debate Adjourned 
Hon. Fernand Robichaud , for Senator Graham, rose pursuant to notice of Thursday, October 2, 1997: 
Whereas the Government of Quebec has indicated that it intends to establish French and English linguistic school boards in Quebec; 
and whereas the National Assembly of Quebec has passed a resolution authorizing an amendment to the Constitution of Canada; 
and whereas the National Assembly of Quebec has reaffirmed the established rights of the English-speaking community of Quebec, specifically the right, in accordance with the law of Quebec, of members of that community to have their children receive their instruction in English language educational facilities that are under the management and control of that community and are financed through public funds; 
and whereas section 23 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms guarantees to citizens throughout Canada rights to minority language instruction and minority language educational facilities under the management and control of linguistic minorities and provided out of public funds; 
and whereas section 43 of the Constitution Act, 1982 provides that an amendment to the Constitution of Canada may be made by proclamation issued by the Governor General under the Great Seal of Canada where so authorized by resolutions of the Senate and House of Commons and of the legislative assembly of each province to which the amendment applies; 
now therefore the Senate resolves that an amendment to the Constitution of Canada be authorized to be made by proclamation issued by His Excellency the Governor General under the Great Seal of Canada in accordance with the schedule hereto.  
SCHEDULE 
AMENDMENT TO THE CONSTITUTION OF CANADA 
CONSTITUTION ACT, 1867 
The Constitution Act, 1867, is amended by adding, immediately after section 93, the following: 
"93A. 
 He has been a successful businessman and an invaluable supporter of the Conservative Party in , whose fortunes more often than not are about on the same level as those of the Liberal Party in Alberta .
 the an in often Quebec are Alberta in more He Conservative on has as not fortunes , Liberal about than businessman invaluable whose the successful . supporter same a of and the Party been Party level of
 , whose of supporter those in Conservative Party a as Party the not in an are same the businessman . has been and He level more about Quebec the fortunes on often than of Liberal Alberta successful
 Party been in Quebec supporter on more Party as an Liberal about . invaluable Alberta of the the He those Conservative whose same often successful not than and , level has the fortunes of are a in
For some time Guy has been slowed down by a serious affliction and he is facing it with his usual fearless determination, which we all pray will contribute to its elimination.  
 all has slowed with usual , will down by determination we pray Guy he elimination it serious For his to a some facing fearless which been affliction and is its time . contribute
 and which by is time For to his a elimination , down we all pray with slowed facing affliction some will determination Guy . been he usual it has contribute its serious fearless
 slowed For time with affliction has been Guy some facing to down his and will it by serious determination . all he a , which we is elimination contribute usual its fearless pray
 will Guy his slowed For time contribute we has by is usual all down , . facing affliction elimination and its pray some which a to with he been it fearless serious determination
 will is which been and his pray with contribute time its down some elimination slowed all to facing determination fearless For by has usual he , we serious it . a Guy affliction
 we some affliction time is . which by all will serious contribute determination slowed Guy fearless facing pray usual elimination to he For down a has been with his it and its ,
 we fearless some which facing contribute and a pray serious For . time is his usual it by to its Guy has determination all will he down affliction been , elimination with slowed
 determination we For elimination by pray . he slowed all fearless some facing it and is will down Guy has serious affliction usual its contribute his to , a with time been which
 slowed is , fearless For elimination all which to Guy serious and facing . his by time a has its some he will it pray usual contribute with determination down been affliction we
 its usual with he by affliction his is a fearless down . and pray , slowed determination to which we been contribute has serious will Guy facing For time it all some elimination
 some by facing affliction been usual . is with all contribute time will to fearless down serious which has Guy , he a it pray determination elimination his we its For slowed and
 to with we which fearless elimination . , determination its down is affliction Guy will it some has his he and by slowed contribute For usual all a serious been pray facing time
 serious has will affliction slowed contribute usual all fearless to been . facing with some its and For is elimination by Guy determination it a which he his time we pray down ,
 determination which been his For and we elimination it is contribute by will a serious usual some has , he time down fearless with pray affliction slowed Guy all its facing . to
 is determination time usual down by to and he which pray . will For affliction been has slowed serious elimination fearless his we contribute all facing it , with Guy its a some
 with facing a been which affliction by slowed serious . For his elimination usual he all some Guy down its time pray has , is we contribute and fearless determination will to it
After hearing the witnesses, the committee was satisfied that a majority of Catholic and Protestant parents - the two groups concerned - supported the amendment to section 93.  
One aspect of the issue that was frequently mentioned is the Quebec National Assembly's unanimous support of Bill 109 and the amendment to section 93. 
Such unanimous votes are significant, but they do not mean there is a consensus in the Catholic and Protestant communities, whose privileges are at stake. 
Such unanimity in the Quebec National Assembly proves nevertheless that support for the amendment transcends party lines. 
The PQ government was reluctant to propose that amendment, because it involved using the amending formula provided for in the Constitution Act of 1982, which that government refuses to recognize. 
The government finally yielded to the pressures from Liberal opposition members.  
Some people were concerned that the debate on national unity might detract from the substance of the amendment. 
If the only concern of the special joint committee had been to prove that "federalism works," it would not have insisted on hearing this evidence showing that there was a consensus among Catholic and Protestant parents. 
From the very beginning, the Government of Quebec assured this Parliament that there was an appropriate consensus in favour of the amendment in that province. 
However, the committee insisted on assessing and challenging these statements - so much so that the Quebec ministers responsible for education and for intergovernmental affairs eventually appeared before the committee, along with the official opposition critics on these matters. 
Clearly, what was - and still is - at issue is the legitimacy of the amendment.  
It was mentioned repeatedly that, as a result of the Supreme Court decisions, it has become obvious that the rights that are positively guaranteed under section 93 are not as broad as they were originally assumed to be. 
However, we do not believe that the amendment was justified because the denominational education rights guaranteed under section 93 were nothing more than empty shells. 
Had we been satisfied that the majority of Catholics or Protestants in Quebec were opposed to the amendment, it would not have mattered whether or not their rights carried much weight. 
I think that Senator Lavoie-Roux was quite right in saying that minorities often require special protection to be free to exercise their rights. 
But it is possible to limit or remove this special protection with the consent of a majority of this minority.  
It was then a matter of figuring out why a majority of members of these two groups were prepared to relinquish these privileges. 
It is important to point out that representatives of all the groups involved were consulted.  
Be that as it may, honourable senators, this amendment will not spell the end of denominational, be it Catholic or Protestant, education in Quebec. 
The Education Act of this province gives parents the right to choose between Catholic or Protestant denominational education for their children. 
 For some time Guy has been slowed down by a serious affliction and he is it with his usual fearless determination , which we all pray will contribute to its elimination .
 some and which all will we , elimination facing . For determination by time slowed to is his a has its usual pray been contribute fearless Guy down affliction it serious he
 For elimination affliction is pray . down slowed contribute serious its been and some which he usual , all by it Guy will his time to determination fearless a with has facing
 he contribute facing his elimination time all its slowed some has it to and down . is usual determination with which fearless For Guy pray a been , we will serious affliction
Yesterday, Guy and his lovely wife, Yolande, celebrated their twenty-fifth wedding anniversary. 
 twenty , - Yesterday , . fifth Guy their lovely Yolande his wife wedding , celebrated anniversary and
 , , wedding lovely . Yesterday wife Yolande celebrated Guy , - twenty anniversary and fifth his their
 Yesterday anniversary - celebrated twenty wedding Yolande his , , . Guy fifth and wife their lovely ,
 their anniversary twenty Guy . celebrated wife lovely Yesterday and Yolande wedding , his fifth , , -
 their Yolande , Yesterday and - , wife , wedding lovely twenty celebrated his anniversary fifth Guy .
 , twenty . anniversary and celebrated Yolande wife lovely their , Guy , Yesterday wedding - fifth his
 Yesterday his wedding , celebrated - fifth and wife Yolande lovely , , anniversary Guy their . twenty
 anniversary lovely celebrated . their - , twenty , wedding Yolande Yesterday his wife fifth and , Guy
 , wife - . wedding , fifth celebrated Guy lovely twenty and his Yolande Yesterday their anniversary ,
 his Guy fifth wedding . twenty , Yesterday , - wife , lovely and anniversary Yolande their celebrated
 , lovely their - anniversary fifth . Yolande Yesterday Guy celebrated , wedding and wife , his twenty
 anniversary celebrated , wedding wife their - fifth , lovely Yesterday Guy and . , Yolande twenty his
 fifth twenty . , anniversary and lovely celebrated Yesterday his , Guy wedding , Yolande their wife -
 , fifth lovely celebrated their wedding Yesterday Guy , . twenty Yolande his wife , anniversary - and
 , Yolande Yesterday and twenty Guy his fifth , wife lovely , anniversary celebrated . wedding - their
 their wife - lovely Guy fifth his , , . , anniversary celebrated Yesterday Yolande twenty and wedding
Even more to the point, the authors of the Constitution Act recognized that section 93's limitations to two privileged Christian beliefs would conflict with the Charter's anti-discrimination implications, so much so that section 93 was provided immunity from the Charter in section 29. 
Indeed, section 29 could not be clearer. 
It reads as follows: 
Nothing in this Charter abrogates or derogates from any rights or privileges guaranteed by or under the Constitution of Canada in respect of denominational, separate or dissentient schools.  
Why the issue of confessional schools as well as other issues crying out for change, such as Senate reform, were left untouched during the long debate before and during patriation and surrounding the Constitution Act itself is for those who were there at the time to explain. 
Certainly a golden opportunity was lost to give Canada a basic law more in tune with modern Canadian society, except for the adoption of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 
Even it is not without its flaws, not the least being the notwithstanding clause which can be subjected to abuse. 
Perhaps all of this is a reflection of the one constant which has marked Canada since its origins, a country identified by its extraordinary political and social diversity and contradictions.  
In any event, we are faced with a request from the Quebec National Assembly to be removed from the obligations to maintain formal Catholic and Protestant school structures in the cities of Montreal and Quebec City and to maintain minority or dissentient Catholic and Protestant schools outside those areas at the request of minority Catholic or Protestant parents, as the case may be. 
Provincial legislation to establish linguistic schools is already being put into effect. 
These can be established without amending section 93. 
Quebec, however, points out that to have multiple school systems can only lead to overlapping, duplication, and confusion, with all their attendant additional costs.  
In addition, religious education as provided for in section 93 is reconfirmed in the province's Education Act, which by itself may be reassuring at first glance, but not in reality as it is a protection which is simply not as iron-clad as a constitutional guarantee.  
When the Education Act, Bill 107, was passed in 1994, the National Assembly agreed to apply the notwithstanding clause so that the privileges given to denominations in section 93 could not be successfully challenged under the Charter. 
Notwithstanding clauses expire every five years and this one is up in 1999. Will it be re-enacted? 
The Parti Québécois, in opposition, voted against it at the time. 
The two ministers who appeared before the joint committee would not reveal their party's position, preferring to await a broad consultation before stating it. 
An uninformed guess, however, leads me to believe that, if the Parti Québécois still forms the government two years hence, the notwithstanding clause will not be renewed, thereby leading to the gradual removal of Catholic and Protestant teaching in public schools as we know it today.  
In rebuttal to this, many will point to a letter sent to the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs by the Bishop of Baie-Comeau on behalf of the Assembly of Quebec Bishops. 
It is dated September 30, 1997, and appears as Appendix H in the joint committee report. 
 Yesterday , Guy and his lovely wife , Yolande , celebrated their twenty fifth wedding anniversary .
 - twenty anniversary , , celebrated fifth Yolande wedding wife lovely and their . his Guy Yesterday
 , his Yolande . anniversary and , Guy celebrated - , wedding fifth lovely Yesterday twenty their
 celebrated . twenty Yolande - Yesterday Guy wife wedding , their , lovely his and fifth anniversary
I extend my congratulations and best wishes to this couple to whom we are greatly indebted for their loyalty and dedication to the Senate.  
 wishes we their and my greatly indebted and this extend the whom . congratulations I couple are dedication best to to to loyalty Senate for
 greatly the extend are couple . to loyalty I whom Senate to congratulations my to this dedication we wishes and and best for their indebted
 extend I and indebted wishes their couple greatly and congratulations loyalty are the . for to Senate whom my dedication to this we to best
 their Senate and I couple whom congratulations greatly . extend and my indebted loyalty for this to we wishes the dedication best are to to
 are their indebted wishes Senate for best to to congratulations loyalty couple to my I extend we greatly . dedication the and this and whom
 to whom are to and greatly we congratulations my Senate I this dedication loyalty and their best wishes for couple extend to the . indebted
 to whom to the for and dedication greatly extend I . their best and are indebted to we wishes couple Senate my congratulations this loyalty
 this the dedication couple whom to greatly . loyalty I we indebted and best wishes extend their and congratulations my are for to Senate to
 my congratulations indebted to to . for best whom Senate and the I and couple to are wishes extend their greatly we dedication loyalty this
 whom this their and wishes indebted the . to congratulations are for we Senate dedication extend to I and best loyalty to couple greatly my
 my to whom best congratulations are Senate this couple greatly to wishes loyalty and extend the . their dedication I and we indebted to for
 the loyalty their to I and are dedication for to extend couple best this we whom Senate and to indebted my wishes . congratulations greatly
 extend Senate loyalty best to dedication for this we the I my and to wishes greatly couple to . congratulations whom their indebted are and
 loyalty indebted and best Senate dedication to for wishes the couple are this I and my extend we whom to greatly their to congratulations .
 to couple loyalty the my indebted and Senate best to I this and their dedication congratulations wishes to whom . greatly are we extend for
 for their my to indebted this Senate and are loyalty the dedication whom congratulations we to greatly . I and best extend to couple wishes
Each institution will have the option of maintaining or reviewing its current status as a Catholic or Protestant school. 
Students will continue to take religion courses or to receive pastoral animation or religious care and guidance services if they so desire.  
Before the end of the third year after the linguistic school boards are in place, the schools will be asked to consult the parents and decide whether or not they wish to maintain their confessional status.  
Those unfamiliar with Catholic and Protestant school boards in Montreal and Quebec City should know that in many cases, particularly in the Protestant system, it is the language of instruction which predominates. 
Many schools have little, if any, religious content, while in others it is very strong. 
Parents already have a say in how much religion they want their children exposed to and that will continue under the new system.  
While section 93 guarantees are only a matter of religious denominations, the essential characteristics of the resulting Quebec school system have, nonetheless, been linguistic. 
One does not speak often of going to a Catholic or Protestant school any more. 
One usually speaks of going to a French or an English school. 
It was inevitable, then, that the committee would be drawn into a debate on how the amendment of section 93 might affect linguistic rights, particularly those claimed by the minority.  
While section 23 of the Charter establishes minority linguistic education rights, Quebec is not bound by all its provisions and so has adopted legislation in this field which, in effect, creates two classes of English-speaking Quebecers as it distinguishes between those educated in Canada and those educated elsewhere. 
Only those parents educated in English in Canada can pass on the benefit of minority English language education to their children. 
Those Quebec parents who were educated in English outside of Canada must have their children educated in French. 
We have in Quebec two classes of English-speaking Quebecers.  
Quebec has been repeatedly criticized for this discrimination, and rightly so. 
How this undesirable situation developed can be traced to the then Minister of Justice, who is Prime Minister today.  
I will quote from his book, Straight from the Heart , where Mr. Chrétien describes how he was responsible for exempting Quebec from the crucial parts of section 23. 
He says: 
During the weeks that followed, I continued to try to overcome Quebec's objections, to the extent of modifying the principle of minority language education and agreeing to fiscal compensation when Quebec opted out of amendments that affected culture and education. 
That required a hell of a lot of selling to Trudeau, but he went along in the end, as did the nine other premiers, who were willing to reopen their sealed bargain in order to bring in Quebec. 
 I extend my congratulations and best wishes to this to whom we are greatly indebted for their loyalty and dedication to the Senate .
 to we to to are and wishes for extend the whom my Senate this . best I congratulations indebted greatly and couple dedication their
 congratulations my their this . to extend to we for best Senate whom greatly and I to dedication couple indebted wishes the loyalty and
 to I to the wishes we couple and Senate my are and greatly this to dedication whom their loyalty for indebted . best extend
May they have many more happy years together.  
 happy May have many they years together more .
 . years happy May more they have together many
 . many years happy together more May have they
 . have more years May happy many they together
 they . May many years happy have more together
 May together many . they years have happy more
 more they many May happy have together . years
 years they many more together have happy May .
 have years May . together they more happy many
 more happy have many . May they years together
 many May have together . happy they more years
 happy more . they many have May together years
 have they May more many years happy . together
 May they happy . have many years together more
 have together . May years they many more happy
 years . they May have more happy many together
CITATION 
2. This Amendment may be cited as the Constitution Amendment (year of proclamation) (Quebec).  
The special joint committee on which I have the honour to sit was given the mandate of studying the proposed amendment to section 93. 
Today, we have before us the resolution to amend section 93 of the Constitution Act, 1867.  
Briefly put, I support this resolution. 
I am also convinced that the majority of Catholic parents in Quebec who enjoy the guarantees provided under section 93 support this amendment, as do the majority of Protestant parents, who are in the same situation.  
However, the Quebec National Assembly will no longer be subject to legislation predating Confederation with respect to denominational instruction.  
These laws of Quebec that predate Confederation and concern Catholic and Protestant denominational schools have led to the creation of an unusual system, which gave Catholic and Protestant parents different rights, according to where they lived in the province.  
Catholic and Protestant school boards are thus to be found protected by the Constitution within the old limits of Montreal and Quebec City. 
Elsewhere in the province the Catholic school boards are not protected by the Constitution, except in predominantly Protestant districts, where Catholic parents are in the minority.  
Outside Montreal and Quebec City, the Constitution protects Protestant school boards if, in a district with a Catholic majority, the Protestant parents are in the minority.  
Honourable senators, educational reform has been a concern of Quebec governments for over 30 years. 
And one of the subjects that keeps coming back, since the publication of the Parent report in the 1960s, is the establishment of school boards on the basis of Canada's two official languages. 
The ongoing challenge was to reconcile linguistic school boards with the constitutional guarantee protecting Catholic and Protestant school boards in Montreal and Quebec City. 
Even though the Supreme Court approved the system contemplated in Bill 107, the theoretical coexistence of linguistic and denominational school boards proved impracticable.  
Obviously, it is primarily in Montreal that it appears most difficult to set up linguistic school boards without having to support an overlap and interpenetration of structures. 
Lorraine Pagé, of the Centrale de l'enseignement du Québec, testified before the committee that, in Montreal: 
...we would have a francophone school board that would include a Catholic sector, a Protestant sector, and another sector; we would also have an anglophone school board which would have a Catholic sector, a Protestant sector and another sector, and in addition to that there would be a Catholic school board - there are so many it gets confusing - where services would have to be offered to francophones and anglophones, and another school board for Protestants, where services would be offered to francophones and anglophones.  
This means that there would be at least four mandatory and separate school boards, including two with three mandatory sectors each and two others with two mandatory sectors each. 
As the witness said, there would be a superimposition of organizational structures. 
 May they have more happy years together .
 May together they have more years many happy
 more happy . have many together May they
 many they May happy years have . more
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
 Hon Alasdair Leader ) Government Graham : ( B . . of the
 . of the Leader Alasdair Graham Government ) . : Hon B (
 Government Graham . of Alasdair B . the Hon ( ) : Leader
 : Hon of ) Alasdair . Leader . the ( Graham Government B
 Graham ( the Leader Hon ) of : . B Alasdair Government .
 the . of Government Hon B ( : Alasdair Graham . Leader )
 ( Graham : the . . ) Alasdair Hon of Leader B Government
 Graham Hon Alasdair ) : Leader . of ( the B Government .
 . Leader Hon Graham the Alasdair ( ) Government . of : B
 B . Leader Hon Alasdair : . ) Government the ( Graham of
 Leader Hon the : Alasdair Government of B ( . . Graham )
 Alasdair B ( ) of Leader Government . the . : Graham Hon
 Government ( ) Alasdair . . Graham : Leader B of Hon the
 . of . ) the Government Leader B ( Hon : Graham Alasdair
 : . Graham ( Alasdair B ) . Hon the of Leader Government
 . ) Graham the ( Alasdair of : B Government . Leader Hon
I ask that the report be printed as an appendix to the Journals of the Senate of this day.  
( For text of report, see today's Journals of the Senate, Appendix "B", p. 321. 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this report be taken into consideration?  
On motion of Senator Gustafson, report placed on the Orders the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate.  
Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration 
Seventh Report of Committee Presented 
Hon. Bill Rompkey , Chair of the Standing Committee on Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration, presented the following report: 
Tuesday, December 9, 1997 
The Standing Committee on Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration has the honour to present its 
SEVENTH REPORT 
Your Committee notes the attendance record of Senator Thompson and recommends that, effective immediately: 
Senator Thompson's use of the Senate resources ordinarily made available to him for the carrying out of his parliamentary functions, including funds, goods, services and premises, be suspended; 
2. Senator Thompson's allowances for travel and telecommunications expenses be suspended, with the exception of his expenses for travel between his place of residence in Ontario and the Senate in Ottawa; and 
3. Senator Thompson may apply in person to have this decision varied to the Standing Committee on Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration, which the Committee has the authority to do.  
Your Committee, in conjunction with the Standing Committee on Privileges, Standing Rules and Orders, is continuing to study this issue.  
Respectfully submitted, 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this report be taken into consideration?  
On motion of Senator Rompkey, report placed on the Orders of the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate.  
 Hon . B Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) :
 ( Hon Graham the Alasdair . : of Government ) . B
 B Government of Leader Graham the Alasdair ( : . ) Hon
 ) . Government Leader Alasdair Graham B the . Hon : of
Honourable senators, someone once said that politics is not a good vocation for anyone who is thin skinned or lacking a sense of humour. 
 skinned that . or said good senators thin politics someone anyone sense not is is humour once vocation who a for , a Honourable of lacking
 said for someone senators is a thin lacking good skinned humour , anyone of politics sense who or . that is vocation not once Honourable a
 Honourable a vocation a or not said politics someone thin of that anyone is senators good is humour once for , sense . skinned who lacking
 , once is a that Honourable politics thin or sense anyone not vocation lacking for is humour someone skinned good who a said of senators .
 skinned someone or a that who good anyone for a not said thin vocation humour is lacking of is . senators politics sense , Honourable once
 a thin for said someone or politics lacking anyone vocation humour once a that . is skinned is senators good who , sense of not Honourable
 sense who thin said vocation not is lacking once anyone that skinned for senators a or good . is politics someone Honourable of a humour ,
 said is a who senators politics for thin Honourable lacking skinned sense or is . good anyone , vocation once not humour of that a someone
 vocation senators politics lacking of anyone thin sense that or who someone a once good Honourable a is skinned for said not , . is humour
 or senators once said lacking , someone Honourable not a sense is politics thin for is good humour of . skinned a anyone vocation that who
 said for good not skinned that a politics of . lacking Honourable is is anyone a someone once vocation , or senators sense thin who humour
 someone Honourable that who said lacking or politics good a is . for sense senators , is once vocation of anyone skinned a not thin humour
 senators once who lacking skinned good vocation is is . thin said that , not a of politics Honourable anyone a someone or humour sense for
 humour of for is anyone good is a lacking . someone or , that said thin once not who a politics sense vocation Honourable senators skinned
 . said for not politics anyone lacking humour Honourable a someone is of vocation or skinned once who is that sense , senators a thin good
 senators a skinned vocation thin said humour sense lacking politics is of , anyone that Honourable . for who is good someone once not a or
That worked for a while. 
Now we have forgotten Mondays, but we have continued on with the practice of having early sittings on Wednesdays. 
As a result, Wednesday has become a normal working session, going on until five or six o'clock. 
The whole purpose of starting the session at 1:30 p.m. has been defeated.  
I do not think it is correct, unless there is an urgency, for committees to sit at the same time as the chamber. 
This is not for appearances' sake, but because the work done here can often be as important in the debates as what goes on in committees. 
At various stages of our work - the introduction of bills, second reading, committee referral, then third reading - we are often doing several at the same time. 
Sometimes even two, three or four committees are sitting when we are sitting. 
That is an improper practice.  
If the deputy leader could guarantee to us that, on Wednesdays from now on - and we will strive to be cooperative - we will sit no later than 3:30 p.m., unless there is a proven urgency, then I think Senator Stewart's motion is in order. 
However, we need that assurance first.  
Senator Carstairs :
Let me assure the Leader and Deputy Leader of the Opposition that we will do everything on our part to ensure that sessions end on time. 
We did sit yesterday, which was a Monday. 
I can assure senators we will be sitting next Monday in order to fulfil the business of the chamber before the Christmas break.  
Senator Kinsella :
On that basis, I do not think leave is necessary.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is leave granted?  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
 Honourable senators , someone once said that politics is not a good for anyone who is thin skinned or lacking a sense of humour .
 once good a is , that senators anyone humour a Honourable or skinned politics said sense not who of someone . thin lacking is for
 humour of Honourable lacking for a sense vocation is that or once senators not thin who anyone good . someone politics , skinned said is
 . is politics not good for Honourable anyone skinned or a someone once senators who vocation of , lacking said thin sense a that humour
How well all of us should understand that saying. 
 How us all of should understand that saying . well
 . understand How of all well that saying us should
 all should How us of well that understand saying .
 saying . of all that understand How well should us
 should understand that . of saying well all How us
 should of us How saying that well . all understand
 of well How all that should understand us saying .
 . well all us understand should of How that saying
 . that understand should all of well How us saying
 How . understand of saying that well should us all
 understand us well should How . that all of saying
 should How of well understand saying us . all that
 saying all should well How . that of understand us
 us . saying of should understand How all that well
 of . all saying us well How understand that should
 that How well . all should saying understand us of
For those people who are in the middle and who will soon be retiring, it is not a big problem for them. 
They will have some reduced benefits and some increased costs. 
To those people who have been paying all their lives - that is, all the baby boomers who will begin to turn 50 - they will receive benefits and be faced with another 15 years of increased costs.  
I will tell you for whom this is important. 
I have a daughter who is 24 and a son who is 21. 
Many of you have children and grandchildren. 
The government is asking them to pay 9.9 per cent - I am sure it is 9.9 per cent because the minister wanted the number to be under the figure 10. That represents 10 per cent of their income, and it will increase with inflation. 
The $35,000 that they pay on today will inevitably be more tomorrow.  
As inflation eats away at it and the numbers rise, that number remains the same. 
This goes against everything we have ever done on this program since its inception in 1966. 
It stays the same. 
In 10 or 15 years, that $3,500 will be worth $1,500, $1,000, $500, depending on what government does and what happens to inflation.  
Senator Taylor :
Elect the Liberals and it will be high!  
Senator Tkachuk :
If we elect the Liberals, inflation will be high? 
We already know that! 
Let me continue in that vein. 
Perhaps honourable senators opposite do not want to hear what Paul Martin will be doing, and the explaining that you will have to do back home in 10 or 15 years when your children ask you what you did about this bill. 
When they retire, their CPP benefits will be worth about what they put in, plus 2.5 per cent.  
 How well all us should understand that saying .
 should all of saying that well understand us .
 well should How all saying of . understand that
 all should How saying of that us understand well
When Senator Guy Charbonneau retired from this place he had, no doubt, thought many times of this very pertinent observation. 
 , pertinent place this no this had Guy When Senator Charbonneau doubt . times from many of observation , retired he very thought
 pertinent he , thought this When place this very doubt Guy , from had of many Charbonneau Senator no observation times retired .
 had doubt this , place thought Guy no many very times , retired this When from pertinent of observation he Senator Charbonneau .
 no this many had pertinent retired this , observation , Charbonneau place times . thought When from Guy very Senator doubt he of
 When , Guy doubt , Senator retired this pertinent he this thought many very no from place times Charbonneau observation . of had
 When many , had , . this from pertinent thought of doubt he place retired Senator times Charbonneau observation very no Guy this
 from this many place times Guy very observation this Charbonneau no , doubt When . he of retired pertinent Senator thought , had
 many Guy , this . Senator this had he , retired no of times thought When very doubt observation place Charbonneau pertinent from
 doubt pertinent Senator When of had Guy . , Charbonneau , very place times this this observation retired thought no he many from
 no this , of very from place , Charbonneau thought . pertinent When observation doubt had he Guy retired Senator times many this
 very When this times Charbonneau Senator from no doubt many this , had retired pertinent place , he . of Guy thought observation
 retired , he had Guy When of this Charbonneau this no Senator very doubt many from observation place , times pertinent . thought
 , Senator this observation of Guy very . , doubt times he this many from place retired Charbonneau no thought pertinent had When
 had Senator When , retired , thought observation many of this he pertinent place no from times doubt Charbonneau this very . Guy
 , from times he thought many no Charbonneau pertinent observation very had this place retired of this Senator , . Guy doubt When
 this , he times observation Charbonneau very Senator this , of place from doubt retired . many Guy pertinent thought had no When
- upholds the principle of freedom of choice in schooling. 
However, the debates of the Joint Committee of the House of Commons and Senate highlighted the fact that the legislation in this area will be jeopardized the moment Quebec is excluded from the application of subsections 1 to 4 of section 93. 
The Committee therefore believes that the amendment could turn out to be something of a time bomb unless the Quebec government is prepared to renew the notwithstanding clauses or look for a better alternative that would allow it to retain in practical terms its authority to enact legislation on denominational schools....  
Finally: 
The Catholic Committee therefore strongly urges the Government of Quebec to immediately find a legal provision, constitutional or otherwise, that would allow it to strike a balance between the requirements of the Charters, including the requirements of section 41 of the Quebec Charter, and the legitimate expectations expressed by the public. 
Such a provision would rid the government of the dilemma described above concerning the use or elimination of the notwithstanding clauses. 
More importantly, it would allow a genuine democratic debate over a new social pact in the area of religious education.  
Given their authorship, I think we have to reflect seriously on these thoughts.  
Before we finally vote, honourable senators, I trust that when the resolution itself is before us we can go into Committee of the Whole to hear any witness who was not heard by the joint committee and whose reflections will guide us. 
In particular, I refer to the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs who, after all, is the sponsor of this resolution on behalf of the Government of Canada. 
He is as well placed as anyone to reply to concerns expressed here and elsewhere. 
I would expect that he would welcome the opportunity to do so before a vote is taken.  
I feel strongly that the minister must share his views with this house and engage in an open and frank exchange directly with its members. 
I urge the leadership on the other side to arrange such a meeting at the earliest opportunity.  
There are still too many unanswered questions and disturbing uncertainties for many senators on both sides of this house to state a firm position at this time. 
The minister should be able to provide assurance, the lack of which so far has caused many of us here to remain hesitant to support this resolution, myself included.  
Hon. Jerahmiel S. Grafstein :
Honourable senators, education is everyone's business. 
When citizens debate their children's education, sometimes passion overwhelms reason.  
It was with some trepidation that I entered the thicket of the Quebec school question, coming as I do from the province of Ontario. 
 When Senator Guy Charbonneau retired from this place he had , no doubt , many times of this very pertinent observation .
 he this Guy had very When . many doubt , Charbonneau no observation pertinent retired times of Senator , thought place this
 times pertinent from doubt of very this many , Senator Guy retired , had Charbonneau place . he When no thought observation
 this doubt pertinent no Charbonneau observation from times many Guy thought retired , had he this place When very of Senator ,
As a veteran of World War II and captain with the proud regiment Les Fusiliers Mont-Royal, he well knew the full import of Sir Winston Churchill's famous observation in which he compared politics to war. 
 he famous of which the veteran Sir captain in World war he well Fusiliers knew proud the Churchill Royal Mont Les , with As politics and ' compared of full a II Winston . import observation - s War regiment to
 captain he Sir Winston well veteran famous import of full ' - in World proud with the he As to . s Royal the Les a knew which of Mont Fusiliers Churchill compared , regiment war politics observation and War II
 famous Sir captain a observation . he import proud compared Winston , the World he ' - Mont with War in II war politics and the to of Les full s of well knew veteran Fusiliers As which Churchill regiment Royal
 famous regiment Winston to Royal war politics ' Mont he s the knew full with proud a World War II of well and he compared As . of which captain - import observation , the in Sir Fusiliers veteran Churchill Les
 Sir well As with ' , proud knew veteran of to . full famous the Winston in Churchill he import captain s the he - observation regiment Mont World politics Royal compared Fusiliers of II which a Les war War and
 observation and of Royal in famous Fusiliers - Churchill he a to with II Sir of War , war politics captain well Winston full which Mont s ' import the knew he compared Les regiment the As proud veteran World .
 he observation World a s of Mont compared of , war captain Les import well with knew the As famous Royal full Sir Fusiliers he . and veteran proud which Winston regiment politics II to in the Churchill ' - War
 proud World well Mont of captain which compared famous Royal Winston in observation Churchill regiment Fusiliers the As to of he and - veteran full . , Les II s politics War ' with he import war knew Sir a the
 to Fusiliers observation War Mont he politics war Royal full the a captain with As World Churchill regiment which Sir proud veteran knew well import famous compared in . s , II - Winston Les ' of of he and the
 famous As veteran Les . Churchill in World s captain observation and Mont - II Fusiliers he well Winston War of which compared Sir Royal , the war with to proud a ' politics full import of regiment the he knew
 Mont - Winston import captain , II War ' and well regiment knew As Churchill famous he Les veteran World full he a compared . of to in the proud Royal observation Fusiliers with Sir s of which war politics the
 II a with import Les the Royal politics full he ' Churchill of , Sir observation s Mont regiment which - . in captain War well of the famous veteran World Winston proud and compared knew Fusiliers to he As war
 War politics war captain Sir II he to , Winston in well s regiment Fusiliers Royal and he veteran of famous compared Churchill observation Mont a with . the knew - which Les As World import the proud of full '
 Mont observation in II s World with import Royal full famous war the ' Fusiliers he Winston to a As compared which proud of Churchill he the regiment veteran of politics well captain knew Les , . and Sir - War
 and Fusiliers well ' Sir compared knew - regiment Winston s famous World captain in the Mont which of Churchill As Royal war observation . of he , full II he politics a to import veteran Les with proud the War
 with to , knew Les World and regiment in Fusiliers full proud Churchill veteran . of Royal Sir import the war the famous As politics captain which compared a s he of ' well observation he II Winston War - Mont
Energy-Department of the Environment-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) table the answer to Question No. 13 on the Order Paper-by Senator Kenny.  
Energy-Department of Justice-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) table the answer to Question No. 26 on the Order Paper-by Senator Kenny.  
Energy-Department of Multiculturalism-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) table the answer to Question No. 31 on the Order Paper-by Senator Kenny.  
Energy-Department of Natural Resources-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) table the answer to Question No. 34 on the Order Paper-by Senator Kenny.  
Defence-Status of Clothe the Soldier Project 
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) table the answer to Question No. 60 on the Order Paper-by Senator Forrestall.  
Defence-Status of the Armoured Personnel Carrier Replacement Program 
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) table the answer to Question No. 61 on the Order Paper-by Senator Forrestall.  
Business of the Senate 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, before I call Orders of the Day, I wish to remind honourable senators that we will be taking the official photograph of the Senate tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
Canada Pension Plan Investment Board Bill 
Second Reading-Debate Continued 
On the Order: 
Resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Kirby, seconded by the Honourable Senator Joyal, P.C., for the second reading of Bill C-2, to establish the Canada Pension Plan Investment Board and to amend the Canada Pension Plan and the Old Age Security Act and to make consequential amendments to other Acts.  
 As a veteran of World War II and captain with the proud regiment Les Fusiliers Mont - Royal , he well knew full import of Sir Winston Churchill ' s famous observation in which he compared politics to war .
 veteran import captain Royal a knew politics Fusiliers War of , II Churchill and regiment - Sir compared the which full Mont ' World . he well Winston Les proud in the As he to s war of with observation
 Winston captain ' Mont As with . II observation - which he he a war Churchill World the regiment of well to and in politics Fusiliers compared Royal the War Sir import veteran of , knew famous full Les proud
 the . War politics famous ' regiment of - war he with observation World Fusiliers , which in compared of As a the to Mont Winston well Sir knew s Les proud II captain and full veteran Churchill Royal import
He noted that in wartime you can be killed only once, but in politics many times.  
 once wartime in only times but many politics He killed , noted be that . can you in
 noted many wartime . killed times once only can be but in , He in you that politics
 be that wartime many can only times killed He you noted once politics but . in , in
 once only be . you in in times , He but killed wartime that noted many can politics
 politics noted He can , be once you in that . many times killed but wartime in only
 in but . , only politics in that can times be killed noted He wartime many once you
 can once but in in , many killed you noted times . politics be only that wartime He
 He killed in noted you politics that , once can many in be wartime . but times only
 wartime you politics , in killed noted that many only in times but be once can He .
 wartime once noted . He you in killed politics only be but can , that times in many
 you times . but He , that in in wartime be once only can noted many killed politics
 , once in that wartime killed He times you noted in can politics be but . many only
 noted killed He times . in you that be once can in only many wartime but , politics
 times wartime you . politics only , noted be in in once killed He but can that many
 He in times only you be . wartime noted but many once can killed that in , politics
 once noted can that be only many , in wartime He in you killed times . politics but
Yesterday, Senator Kirby said it was not a payroll tax. 
The Department of Finance did a study in April 1995 which was reported in The Toronto Star . 
The study noted that the relatively modest increase of CPP premiums between 1986 and 1993 resulted in 26,000 fewer jobs. 
It further noted that the increases have had and will continue to have a negative impact on the labour force. 
That contradicts the government's arguments that CPP premiums are not a payroll tax but, rather, a pension contribution. 
In their own report, the Department of Finance stated that employers' contributions to CPP and the Quebec Pension Plan are part of the compulsory payroll tax. 
The department warned against higher payroll taxes in that same report and called this tax just that, namely, a payroll tax.  
We on this side strongly believe there are a number of important issues contained in this bill that we should discuss before it is passed. 
There should be decreases in other taxes, perhaps other payroll taxes such as the employment insurance payroll tax, to make up for the increases in the CPP, so that the negative impact on jobs will not be felt as strongly.  
We should have a full evaluation of any changes to the Old Age Security system and how it will affect future incentives to save. 
The Auditor General should have free access not only to the fund but also to the board itself, lifting the limits on RRSP contributions so that people can have an opportunity to look after themselves, and removing the foreign investment restrictions on RRSP investments.  
Honourable senators, there are elements of truth in all things nefarious. 
That is why we call it propaganda. 
The government is an accomplished practitioner in this art of propaganda, with their plea to save the CPP and their prediction of dire consequences if action is not taken today, this minute. 
They made only token consultations. 
Invoking closure on the debate on Bill C-2 was the first indication of the government's intention. 
Now we are being told in the Senate by the government that it is important to act now because the Minister of Finance has an agreement with the provinces.  
The government's usual modus operandi is diversion, mixed with a little fabrication. 
It was convenient to have the diversion of a postal strike with its ensuing back-to-work legislation before the house while Bill C-2 was being introduced in the other place and closure was being imposed. 
It was also convenient for the government to falsely accuse the former prime minister of criminal intent and behaviour after its incompetence was fully exposed to the Canadian public following the Quebec referendum.  
 noted that in wartime you can be killed only once , but in politics many times .
 many that killed in wartime times you He once only , can politics be in noted .
 that in once in wartime times you . be killed can many only noted , He politics
 many He once can that only politics wartime . you but noted killed in be times ,
As the longest serving Senate Speaker in Canadian history, Senator Charbonneau has no doubt experienced many times the full import of Harold Wilson's wry assertion that in politics a week can be a very long time.  
 Senate that s no can politics the a the in Canadian very many ' Speaker . experienced full serving , doubt Senator time long As Harold assertion longest a wry import of times in history be week has Wilson Charbonneau
 assertion Charbonneau s wry in , Harold of has in no the the week a can longest Canadian full doubt Senator long that very politics be times Wilson ' experienced serving import . As Speaker Senate many a time history
 longest Canadian politics serving the many ' experienced long Speaker can full doubt a times be of in week s , Senator that wry a assertion has import Charbonneau very time Wilson the Senate in no Harold As history .
 very of full has a serving many Charbonneau in time the no in Canadian longest Wilson s Senator week times Harold wry ' politics Speaker import a assertion can long Senate be that history experienced . As the , doubt
 assertion has that in , times Senator politics import longest serving the Charbonneau in Senate history no a wry s week Harold Canadian the As many a ' . can full of Wilson very time experienced long Speaker doubt be
 in long many Charbonneau Speaker Wilson Senator wry be history import Senate ' Harold a serving of no Canadian the time in full . a assertion can very experienced times has week s longest the As , that doubt politics
 , doubt no history import s can Senate ' experienced Speaker politics in a serving that the assertion time Canadian Wilson a be week of Senator wry As full Harold very has . longest times Charbonneau in many long the
 ' can many a time s long wry of Wilson Senator that the , week Speaker full has assertion history no experienced be import the serving . in in Canadian politics longest Charbonneau a very doubt times As Harold Senate
 ' politics of Speaker . times experienced long longest Wilson in the in Harold a the wry be history full Senator time Charbonneau s can assertion very serving no has week many Senate doubt , that As Canadian import a
 Harold the long . wry in week no doubt As ' in full times Wilson experienced history assertion many politics that very import can Charbonneau the a time Speaker , longest Senator a Senate be serving Canadian s has of
 of be wry times longest Canadian no s long Senate time in a experienced many assertion week in Speaker . the ' , Charbonneau can politics has Wilson import doubt the serving very Senator history Harold full that a As
 Charbonneau that the politics , longest . time has ' s Senator assertion history wry no import full Wilson many times Speaker a a experienced week be Senate As can very of the serving in long doubt Canadian in Harold
 import serving longest a many that the very be long times assertion As Harold experienced of in in Wilson week politics Canadian no ' full time has wry can Senator Speaker Senate doubt Charbonneau history , . a s the
 doubt , Harold Senate wry serving be As history Speaker full Wilson can assertion the times ' import Senator has Charbonneau long politics of in many experienced very that . in a longest a the s no week time Canadian
 doubt politics Canadian Speaker wry many import a Senate time ' , Wilson no that can week be longest . Charbonneau As the very in in serving has full history s Harold a times long assertion of the Senator experienced
 many a the ' wry Speaker full time Senator of , Wilson the very serving no doubt politics longest times . be Senate assertion As has Canadian that in a Harold Charbonneau long week history in can experienced import s
My third point concerns the relationship between the government, the Minister of Finance in particular, and the agency in question. 
It will always be tempting to use these funds to finance governments, at lower rates than if it had been invested in the open market. 
That is, in fact, what has been done since 1996 under the present system. 
It must be ensured that a conflict of interest of this kind is not permitted at all. 
I will return to this shortly.  
My fourth point concerns investment policy. 
The law should provide that the administrators of the fund are responsible for ensuring contributors a reasonable pension, while providing them with the best return, that is, the safest and best return possible.  
Canada's economy represents about 2.5 per cent of the world economy. 
So it would be wise to permit the fund not only to diversify its investments in stocks and bonds but also to invest worldwide. 
Diversification of values, in a variety of instruments, in various sectors, in different countries and currencies is thus a measure of wisdom and judgement to be left to those in charge, who must, of course, be accountable for their actions.  
Honourable senators, it would be tempting for the administrators to act as investors on occasion by investing in all sorts of businesses with their judgement either arbitrary or verging on patronage. 
We have seen this in Quebec. 
There must be strict rules to prevent this sort of thing, if we want to avoid regrettable misuse.  
The matter of the pension plan's objectives is basic. 
In this respect, the legislation must be clear. 
The board must first and foremost look after the interests of the contributors whose income security depends on its performance to a large extent.  
The history of the Quebec Caisse de dépôt et placement warrants examination in this regard. 
In the mid-1960s, at the time it was set up, Mr. Lesage, the Premier of Quebec at the time, described it as an instrument of social security. 
He added, at the instigation of some, that it would also be an instrument of economic development, with the result that, little by little, the managers who were not sufficiently dynamic in the eyes of the directors were replaced. 
It was not Mr. Caouette's money, it was real bucks. 
 As the longest serving Senate Speaker in Canadian history , Senator Charbonneau has no doubt experienced many times the full import of Harold Wilson ' s wry assertion that in politics a can be a very long time .
 , experienced import . long assertion Canadian Charbonneau be times very politics the Speaker time history the has Wilson doubt a that no in full Senator Harold s week ' wry longest As in a many serving can Senate
 longest the doubt Harold Senator that Speaker Canadian week very politics a has many s in As experienced in serving Senate Charbonneau Wilson times can long history , no . full time import assertion be ' of a wry
 doubt that s a in of import ' full . Senator no long very history be politics Senate serving the many in times Canadian can As week has experienced a , assertion Speaker wry longest time Harold Charbonneau the
When is the press going to start recognizing that the Senate has been on the leading edge of just about every issue - things like free trade with the United States, radar defence in the North, the scourge of soil erosion, such as that leading to the tragedy in Ethiopia and, yes, even Senate reform.  
 , yes edge the that recognizing , leading scourge of just the Senate the to even of press issue is going defence free like has leading and in radar tragedy been with trade that things the , every soil such When Senate , , the Ethiopia States in North about as start the on reform erosion United to - the .
 United with just to press that been has in defence , things . leading such free tragedy edge the the , radar the as of going erosion , soil trade start leading When on about in recognizing the and to that is reform like , , States the issue the Ethiopia of the Senate scourge North even yes Senate every -
 trade of the been that the the the States as with going erosion defence - the such like and , things just North recognizing soil Senate on , about that the scourge has , in radar free to every Senate Ethiopia yes . edge of leading the to , United even in When start , issue is leading tragedy reform press
 , the leading the yes reform , - to Senate as edge North , soil When and the such , just the tragedy of defence the erosion Senate things trade the , even been radar Ethiopia is States . the scourge recognizing start of every free United on leading going that issue in in about press to with that like has
 every soil start Senate defence Ethiopia the been trade even tragedy Senate like with that is has on as . leading radar of to issue the North , , press , reform and the yes of the about to things , the the United going such the free in scourge erosion States in leading recognizing When - that edge , just
 even press . like Senate in to trade been When going reform the is in start , , things just , the North States the leading tragedy that radar erosion such of leading the that of and , with soil as the every yes Ethiopia the about United , on Senate - defence has issue to edge scourge recognizing free the
 of the Senate the leading like every tragedy , going has the is When the to edge , States just even start press recognizing Ethiopia defence yes such that scourge of the about the to with United soil North , leading free in - the and on issue Senate things in erosion radar been that as , reform . trade ,
 , the and tragedy the like United , things edge reform going , soil with recognizing issue North , When to leading defence the leading , press of - of even the the Senate the radar yes such in the been free States scourge has on Senate in just . erosion every is to about start as that trade Ethiopia that
 reform North soil edge just such States and the been , radar Senate every even yes that in scourge the as trade of to has free Senate , the to recognizing Ethiopia things with United , , . about defence , that tragedy - start leading erosion press leading in issue going on the the the the like of When is
 , issue the things start , the scourge tragedy every States has such been free recognizing to reform , defence erosion United even soil the that press leading of as yes of the just trade about Ethiopia like radar Senate with the - is on . When , the North that and the Senate in to in , leading edge going
 in Ethiopia such Senate and the leading things has of , recognizing Senate going trade the reform United just on the - edge is tragedy When every defence scourge , , North erosion about soil press radar the States start to like issue , with to in , that as the of the . leading free been even the that yes
 with that even of in press the of North radar the start , United , going on every yes in has leading Senate Ethiopia reform When just the issue . been - erosion , the about to such and tragedy the scourge defence recognizing to Senate soil things States like as leading free , edge the is , trade that the
 just , in is leading the like has edge to North When and in of soil such even every things the the been , with that Senate the Ethiopia , defence start scourge about tragedy on the United . free yes , reform Senate the erosion leading press going States issue radar - , recognizing trade of to that as the
 defence the , on . of the leading radar about to trade in United start , the that When in North Senate been going the leading the has to is just reform press yes like the tragedy the Senate soil erosion Ethiopia of free things , every with scourge , recognizing as such issue States even - and edge that ,
 been the of erosion the just as to start the and Ethiopia even free scourge recognizing every to Senate the such Senate soil - press on reform leading North the edge that of that trade has , with going like things yes about United , defence leading is . radar the When , States issue the , , in tragedy in
 with yes in even going leading - , and issue been radar as Ethiopia every of When States reform the to Senate the , press of to North . about tragedy defence the recognizing the free start leading , Senate trade erosion the is edge such like , things that that on just the United has in soil scourge the ,
Alliance Quebec, the foremost, mainstream English group, appeared at first to oppose section 93. 
However, on cross examination - and this is the value of the committee hearings - their interest was not so much in opposing section 93. 
Rather, their interest was focused on the failure of section 23(1)( a ) of the Charter to be proclaimed in Quebec. 
As Senator Lynch-Staunton put it so well, it means that there are in effect two classes in Quebec as it presently pertains. 
If you are English speaking and you come from outside of Canada, your children will be streamed by the Quebec government into the French-language stream. 
That is unfair. 
They are not without some type of relief and I will address that later.  
However, this is an issue of linguistic rights. 
Here the question is not of linguistic rights but denominational privileges.  
In cross-examining Alliance Quebec, it was clear that they did not oppose the amendments to section 93 but rather the enforcement of section 23(1)( a ). Section 23(1)( a ) requires a proclamation by the Province of Quebec, and a declaration of this proclamation is, of course, not within federal powers. 
We gave that up in 1982.  
Senator Pitfield knows this well. 
He was an architect of the Constitution Act, 1982. 
It is clearly within the four corners of the assembly of Quebec to proclaim, if it chooses, section 23(1)( a ). Many of us are unhappy with this aspect of section 23(1)( a ). Students in over 13,000 families have been precluded from entering the English stream because the Province of Quebec has refused to proclaim section 23(1)( a ). 
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Who put it in?  
Senator Grafstein :
Rather, they wished to use this opportunity to leverage the Government of Quebec to proclaim section 23(1)( a ). This the Quebec government was clearly not prepared to do.  
The second group, the aboriginal groups within Quebec, claimed that this resolution detrimentally affected their rights. 
The report makes clear - and we came to this conclusion aided and abetted by legal advice and statements by both Quebec and federal ministers - that aboriginal rights were in no way, shape or form, affected by this resolution. 
 When is the press going to start recognizing that the Senate has been on the leading edge of just about every issue - things like free trade with the United States , radar defence in the North , scourge of soil erosion , such as that leading to the tragedy in Ethiopia and , yes , even Senate reform .
 press free in yes , that . , leading soil the defence erosion the United North has issue the in with the of , to the that Ethiopia every and such just on things of Senate about States Senate as start recognizing like radar is the the been , - to reform , leading When tragedy even scourge going edge
 soil things on . North that , the about going press in issue trade to the United that every edge such has in the leading to scourge erosion of leading free , yes and , even Ethiopia - When just of is the tragedy as , radar like Senate been the Senate States with start the , the reform defence
 , Ethiopia that issue scourge States reform every the such trade has just as in North things . the , the in press leading start United radar , edge about soil the even is tragedy the yes of - , , erosion that of the with When like going been recognizing free leading Senate and Senate defence to on to
On the leading edge: on the leading edge of the study of child poverty; on the leading edge of studies into media concentration; on the leading edge of studies into science and technology and studies into the revolutionary changes in telecommunications; on the leading edge of an ongoing intensive review of financial services. 
 leading the into leading an the the : telecommunications poverty intensive technology edge in on on studies of on child services concentration of the ; studies study edge the . ; and the changes and the leading ongoing into leading edge science of studies of edge of into media review financial On of on leading revolutionary edge ;
 on edge review On the services and . into the child edge revolutionary on edge of changes in the leading studies the ; of of on intensive the edge science studies leading leading and poverty ongoing : media edge technology concentration an of study of into telecommunications leading into on the of the financial ; leading ; studies
 services studies into science of media of review into edge concentration on . ongoing an ; leading revolutionary edge on intensive studies On child poverty edge the the financial the of changes of and leading technology leading the studies leading in on into leading of the of ; and : study on the telecommunications ; edge edge the
 leading leading into concentration of leading on technology of child the of on intensive study and media changes financial ; ; ; of leading studies of the edge edge on the edge edge the services ongoing leading science . into studies telecommunications the and poverty revolutionary on studies review in : On the an the of edge into
 science . the the into and ; on into of edge ; and On edge leading changes leading the on poverty leading of media of edge services edge child edge into of studies of the ; financial revolutionary the concentration telecommunications the : in on on intensive ongoing leading the review technology leading an study studies studies of
 of and the . poverty the intensive into edge financial of and of in the edge media of into ; ; edge studies leading edge review science on of ; telecommunications technology leading studies revolutionary study studies an leading into On the : leading on of ongoing on concentration the the on leading changes services the edge child
 of on financial studies On of edge ; into on of studies of an into the intensive the of studies ; review edge leading concentration edge study the science media : ongoing leading leading ; revolutionary on changes technology edge and telecommunications and leading services in the child leading of . edge the on poverty the into the
 on of into review poverty on the leading studies edge leading into on edge concentration the the : study ; leading of revolutionary edge of and child the the the an into services of ; science of . financial intensive edge in of telecommunications ongoing On edge technology media leading ; studies studies leading the on changes and
 study services the concentration leading into an and poverty leading technology into edge financial on the ongoing ; the the edge review of the telecommunications studies edge of the of edge edge child and on studies science changes on leading . on in ; leading the intensive On of of leading into : media ; studies of revolutionary
 study concentration telecommunications on of the the financial of studies ; science revolutionary into on changes technology . into on and on edge of studies leading the the leading in of ; leading edge the the studies media ongoing review of On : of leading services child intensive into edge poverty the edge an and leading edge ;
 science an studies leading of On of and poverty edge review the on studies in ; telecommunications into and technology studies the the leading leading media revolutionary concentration edge on financial the the services edge the edge the into ; ongoing of of changes on of leading child : leading intensive on edge study ; into of .
 the On and in telecommunications on leading : into into of changes studies an studies ; edge on poverty ongoing the and science into leading the concentration the intensive ; revolutionary edge services the of leading leading child ; of leading financial of the of on media study studies edge review the technology edge on of . edge
 the science on ; the of the on and of edge . ongoing on studies services telecommunications leading the poverty an edge leading edge studies changes studies media technology into child in financial edge review of the into on edge of leading leading ; leading of ; of and the On into intensive study concentration the : revolutionary
 edge of edge and of services ; ongoing on edge science the On on and concentration leading leading study technology in an ; the media leading poverty revolutionary intensive the the the studies of . ; leading into on the into of edge studies telecommunications changes review of child edge the of on leading : studies into financial
 poverty of of on on review and changes and services ; concentration the into of studies into On on media revolutionary . : child of the science leading the of technology studies leading leading ongoing edge the ; ; financial leading on the intensive into edge in edge of an the leading the edge edge studies telecommunications study
 media on into intensive science technology on child of studies edge leading edge leading : the On of studies into an on in financial of ongoing the poverty concentration services the leading ; of on . revolutionary of the leading and the ; telecommunications review of leading studies study the edge and edge changes edge into the ;
The Constitution Act, 1867, is amended by adding, immediately after section 93, the following: 
"93A. 
Paragraphs (1) to (4) of section 93 do not apply to Quebec." 
CITATION 
2. This Amendment may be cited as the Constitution Amendment (year of proclamation) (Quebec).  
The special joint committee on which I have the honour to sit was given the mandate of studying the proposed amendment to section 93. 
Today, we have before us the resolution to amend section 93 of the Constitution Act, 1867.  
Briefly put, I support this resolution. 
I am also convinced that the majority of Catholic parents in Quebec who enjoy the guarantees provided under section 93 support this amendment, as do the majority of Protestant parents, who are in the same situation.  
However, the Quebec National Assembly will no longer be subject to legislation predating Confederation with respect to denominational instruction.  
These laws of Quebec that predate Confederation and concern Catholic and Protestant denominational schools have led to the creation of an unusual system, which gave Catholic and Protestant parents different rights, according to where they lived in the province.  
Catholic and Protestant school boards are thus to be found protected by the Constitution within the old limits of Montreal and Quebec City. 
Elsewhere in the province the Catholic school boards are not protected by the Constitution, except in predominantly Protestant districts, where Catholic parents are in the minority.  
Outside Montreal and Quebec City, the Constitution protects Protestant school boards if, in a district with a Catholic majority, the Protestant parents are in the minority.  
Honourable senators, educational reform has been a concern of Quebec governments for over 30 years. 
And one of the subjects that keeps coming back, since the publication of the Parent report in the 1960s, is the establishment of school boards on the basis of Canada's two official languages. 
The ongoing challenge was to reconcile linguistic school boards with the constitutional guarantee protecting Catholic and Protestant school boards in Montreal and Quebec City. 
Even though the Supreme Court approved the system contemplated in Bill 107, the theoretical coexistence of linguistic and denominational school boards proved impracticable.  
Obviously, it is primarily in Montreal that it appears most difficult to set up linguistic school boards without having to support an overlap and interpenetration of structures. 
Lorraine Pagé, of the Centrale de l'enseignement du Québec, testified before the committee that, in Montreal: 
 On the leading edge : on the edge of the study of child poverty ; on the leading edge of studies into media concentration ; on the leading edge of studies into science and technology and studies into the revolutionary changes in telecommunications ; on the leading edge of an ongoing intensive review of financial services .
 technology leading studies ; ; of of and of edge of studies study an leading leading the edge and the on the : the of in into into concentration the of into on financial the review edge poverty leading media on edge ; telecommunications science revolutionary studies ongoing changes edge intensive On . leading on the services
 financial . in ongoing studies ; an leading edge into the poverty telecommunications services child of concentration on revolutionary on on on of the technology leading ; edge the On leading changes leading edge of the the into studies into science of edge the the and of and of media intensive studies review ; study edge :
 of ; into on of edge telecommunications of on leading concentration of study the On leading an the the into technology revolutionary on the leading . edge of studies ongoing media ; and edge poverty of edge edge leading ; review on and studies changes services science : leading into the financial intensive the in the studies
On all these subjects, on all these fronts, the Senate, though seldom misunderstood and often misjudged, served as the guardian at the gate. 
 On misunderstood Senate fronts and , all , these guardian misjudged though served on gate the as . seldom the subjects , , these all often the at
 as and . , served , , subjects Senate On fronts on guardian gate at the all these seldom all though often misjudged , misunderstood the these the
 served the , the the often subjects though . guardian these , as Senate seldom On all fronts at , on and gate misjudged , misunderstood these all
 gate the though often served these the . guardian , misunderstood fronts these misjudged , as all On and on , Senate all , at the subjects seldom
 served , the . the gate On , misunderstood at guardian Senate , and often as fronts , these these subjects all the seldom all misjudged though on
 Senate these gate and all the misjudged though guardian seldom On at fronts all often served , the the , subjects misunderstood , as these , on .
 Senate served On misunderstood all as guardian the subjects these , , seldom and the on . fronts , , often these misjudged gate the though at all
 served subjects , Senate though at , these all , the gate , as On fronts all and often misjudged misunderstood seldom guardian these the . the on
 gate at guardian , often the served subjects , fronts misjudged , . and these all Senate misunderstood all on seldom the though , these On as the
 these all On these the , all misjudged the guardian fronts seldom Senate , , on and served often . at the subjects gate as though misunderstood ,
 misunderstood often though these guardian , all seldom Senate served misjudged , subjects . and gate on as the On fronts all at the the these , ,
 the served these . the often as fronts misjudged gate seldom on misunderstood these all On , , the though all guardian Senate and , , subjects at
 misunderstood subjects all gate fronts guardian all the often , on served at , seldom the though these misjudged , the these . Senate , and On as
 the these subjects as all though , at the Senate and . , these misjudged all misunderstood gate often On served fronts guardian on seldom the , ,
 subjects these , the gate on all these at On though the guardian all . misjudged and often the as seldom , fronts misunderstood Senate , served ,
 , On , misunderstood at the on misjudged these often the subjects gate though served guardian the as . Senate and seldom these all fronts , , all
If there is an amendment to the Constitution, each senator in his or her heart and mind, after reviewing the testimony, must come to a conclusion. 
He or she can either vote for, against or abstain from the vote on the resolution.  
They want to be under the law, as does the Province of Newfoundland. 
They want to be under the Constitution. 
If they meet the standards of a constitutional change, I, for one, will support them, notwithstanding the fact that I mistrust their motivation and mistrust what they say. 
However, on matter of dealing with the rule of law, I am bound by the rule of law.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
My question has nothing to do with that answer. 
It was renewed in 1982 and given protection from the Charter. 
Quebec has finally adopted a linguistic school system that looks very promising and can be implemented without section 93 being amended, unlike Newfoundland, which needs an amendment to Term 17 to be able to implement a non-denominational system. 
The two resolutions are completely different in content and intent.  
Again, my question relates to the fact that the new linguistic school board process is well under way. 
There will be elections to the boards in June. 
What impact does the modification of section 93 or the non-modification of section 93 have on what is already under way?  
Senator Grafstein :
Again, honourable senators, there are two solitudes here. 
I believe that education, in pith and substance, is a provincial matter.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
That is not the question.  
Senator Grafstein :
 On all these subjects , on all these fronts , the Senate , though seldom and often misjudged , served as the guardian at the gate .
 the at fronts , served gate all seldom the the misunderstood . , though on misjudged often these and , these , subjects all On as Senate
 misjudged these . Senate as , and though the often On these all guardian the on subjects at the served , fronts seldom all gate , ,
 On though subjects at , the fronts guardian all . on served Senate often gate as all misjudged , misunderstood and , the these seldom the these
But that role carries with it grave and onerous responsibilities; it carries with it grave and onerous duties; it carries with it the recognition that the times demand that in everything we do we remain true to our sovereign and to ourselves.  
 onerous with we our that that the onerous in ourselves and to demand recognition it grave true carries responsibilities carries it the ; duties sovereign ; with everything grave times But remain it we and role and carries to do it it . with that
 grave it that sovereign duties ; we grave . role and with our with we demand everything carries onerous and it to But that and times that the true to remain ourselves it in onerous it it the ; carries with responsibilities recognition do carries
 role in duties we But that that with ; carries onerous the demand the times grave it and ourselves it true it we responsibilities it and recognition with our sovereign . to everything onerous do it with grave ; that carries remain to carries and
 grave and in But onerous true the duties role ; it grave with times and to that it with ; it that and do carries with to sovereign ourselves carries demand responsibilities . it onerous we we that remain the recognition everything carries it our
 that in we it the duties ourselves to . and onerous grave and carries our recognition it true carries ; with onerous responsibilities with But that it remain ; the carries sovereign we it times role and demand do grave with it that everything to
 it and that remain ; ourselves onerous that the with it do times role . it with grave it and we the it and we our to that everything with But duties carries recognition carries ; demand in responsibilities carries grave sovereign true onerous to
 carries true do But with the the to ourselves with everything in . that it role that it demand times our sovereign we onerous remain that it and responsibilities carries to recognition ; and ; grave with onerous grave and it it we duties carries
 and with the carries that responsibilities do true role with grave . ourselves it recognition grave that But our ; onerous to we sovereign carries to it onerous times with demand that the everything in it remain it we duties and it ; carries and
 onerous in role we with onerous the recognition it do it . carries that it sovereign it grave and true that we responsibilities grave ; with with and carries to ; our duties remain it carries ourselves times But demand everything the that and to
 it grave But grave ; our and remain that ; times everything and to true and sovereign demand with role in it onerous it to with onerous responsibilities duties the that carries ourselves . with do carries we it we it the that recognition carries
 the to ; responsibilities ; grave we do with role . remain and ourselves to onerous and the our times it grave that that that carries But recognition it onerous demand with sovereign it duties everything true we carries carries it with and it in
 ; carries responsibilities that duties role onerous to we ; times it and it it with But remain that grave everything carries that to our carries ourselves the do . with sovereign in with onerous it the recognition grave it and true demand and we
 role with responsibilities times carries true the with and demand it it duties But our onerous and it ourselves recognition the ; grave it carries do that we it that to sovereign that ; with we remain and onerous grave carries everything . in to
 it in everything grave onerous ourselves times that that and it recognition grave with with we it to that the role true do we and . to our and duties But carries carries onerous the ; ; responsibilities it sovereign with demand it remain carries
 recognition ; in carries the we it duties and carries that grave with everything and it do the grave onerous responsibilities true our it to . we with ourselves with ; carries that to it demand and it sovereign remain times that onerous role But
 sovereign . true everything we recognition ; times grave do it that with responsibilities role it onerous with demand with carries it the and and remain carries onerous and in our that that we grave to carries ourselves to ; duties But the it it
I do not think that we are handmaidens. 
We do not have to take orders. 
We must do what is right.  
This bill has important consequences for many of us, and more particularly, for our children and our grandchildren. 
Those people who are already retired and at the age of 65 will receive all their benefits. 
For those people who are in the middle and who will soon be retiring, it is not a big problem for them. 
They will have some reduced benefits and some increased costs. 
To those people who have been paying all their lives - that is, all the baby boomers who will begin to turn 50 - they will receive benefits and be faced with another 15 years of increased costs.  
I will tell you for whom this is important. 
I have a daughter who is 24 and a son who is 21. 
Many of you have children and grandchildren. 
The government is asking them to pay 9.9 per cent - I am sure it is 9.9 per cent because the minister wanted the number to be under the figure 10. That represents 10 per cent of their income, and it will increase with inflation. 
The $35,000 that they pay on today will inevitably be more tomorrow.  
As inflation eats away at it and the numbers rise, that number remains the same. 
This goes against everything we have ever done on this program since its inception in 1966. 
It stays the same. 
In 10 or 15 years, that $3,500 will be worth $1,500, $1,000, $500, depending on what government does and what happens to inflation.  
Senator Taylor :
Elect the Liberals and it will be high!  
Senator Tkachuk :
 But that role carries with it grave and onerous responsibilities ; it carries with it grave and onerous duties ; it carries with it the that the times demand that in everything we do we remain true to our sovereign and to ourselves .
 demand carries we our But onerous to role it duties and sovereign times we the ourselves everything onerous ; do recognition the it to that it remain with carries grave that it ; carries with grave that and responsibilities with true . and it
 and our recognition times to grave demand duties it carries it carries that with . with and everything onerous grave with we it and role true ourselves carries the that ; in remain we sovereign But do to it onerous ; it that responsibilities
 remain everything and it our onerous ; it to it sovereign . with the demand with it the duties grave do in that and carries But that we carries ourselves ; and recognition onerous grave we carries true times it role with to that
Speaker Charbonneau served this house both in good and in bad times. 
 served this both . times in bad Speaker house good and Charbonneau in
 good Speaker times bad and served in this in Charbonneau . house both
 served Speaker and good times in house this bad in Charbonneau both .
 served . house Charbonneau in bad in this good and both times Speaker
 times this house good bad in both and Charbonneau . in Speaker served
 bad times served Speaker both house good . and this in Charbonneau in
 house good this in bad times Charbonneau served and Speaker . both in
 good and in this in house times bad served Charbonneau Speaker both .
 in this in served and good Charbonneau Speaker bad . house times both
 Charbonneau both house . good bad in times Speaker served in this and
 bad this Speaker times both in . and Charbonneau good in house served
 good Speaker Charbonneau in bad this times both in . served house and
 times and . both house in Charbonneau Speaker in good this bad served
 Speaker served both in and bad this house times good Charbonneau in .
 Speaker bad . both in in good this and Charbonneau served house times
 in times good . and in Speaker this Charbonneau served both bad house
As parliamentarians, honourable senators, it is our role to help promote this book and educate our fellow citizens on their rights as voters.  
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
Report of Committee 
Hon. Ron Ghitter , Chair of the Standing Senate Committee on Energy, the Environment and Natural Resources, presented the following report: 
Tuesday, December 9, 1997 
The Standing Senate Committee on Energy, the Environment and Natural Resources has the honour to present its 
SECOND REPORT 
Respectfully submitted, 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this bill be read the third time?  
On motion of Senator Butts, bill placed on the Orders of the Day for third reading at the next sitting of the Senate.  
Income Tax Conventions Implementation Act, 1997 
Report of Committee 
Hon. Michael Kirby , Chairman of the Standing Senate Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce, presented the following report: 
Tuesday, December 9, 1997 
The Standing Senate Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce has the honour to present its 
SIXTH REPORT 
Your Committee, to which was referred the Bill C-10, Act to implement a convention between Canada and Sweden, a convention between Canada and the Republic of Kazakhstan, a convention between Canada and the Republic of Iceland and a convention between Canada and the Kingdom of Denmark for the avoidance of double taxation and the prevention of fiscal evasion with respect to taxes on income and to amend the Canada-Netherlands Income Tax Convention Act, 1986 and the Canada-United States Tax Convention Act, 1984, has examined the said Bill in obedience to its Order of Reference dated December 8, 1997, and now reports the same without amendment.  
Respectfully submitted, 
The Hon. the Speaker :
 Speaker Charbonneau served house both in good and in bad times .
 times Speaker . in both Charbonneau house and good this served in
 . bad and Charbonneau good in this Speaker served both in times
 Speaker served this good bad times and house Charbonneau in in both
He witnessed major events that marked the history of this House. 
 . this House major witnessed that the history marked of events He
 events that House this marked history of the He major . witnessed
 He House . events of history that the major this witnessed marked
 events He major of history the this House . marked witnessed that
 He of marked the major this that House history . events witnessed
 the major history that this He House events marked witnessed . of
 House witnessed He the of history marked events this that . major
 this major He . that of the history witnessed events House marked
 the history that House events marked this witnessed He major of .
 . House history this He major of witnessed that marked the events
 this history . marked that events House the of He major witnessed
 that history marked this events major the House . of witnessed He
 marked history this witnessed of events He . major the House that
 House of marked He major witnessed events history . that the this
 that . witnessed major the He this history marked of House events
 history . House that He witnessed events marked major of the this
Senator Tkachuk :
Since taking office, they have taken $300 million in new taxes from senior citizens by income-testing the age credit. 
They want Canadians to mature their RRSPs by the year they turn 69 rather than the previous age limit of 71. 
However, seniors do not know about it, and this will be another huge tax grab - Merry Christmas, Canada - by the Liberal Government and Paul Martin. 
Twice they have killed plans to increase the RRSP contribution limits so that people could put money away for their future given that the government will not provide for them.  
The Canadian Association of Retired Persons says that as many as 80,000 Canadians may fail to convert their RRSPs on time. 
Where are the big advertising programs of the Government of Canada which they mount when they really want to advertise something? 
This is a government program they do not want to advertise. 
They want it to slip in, just like this bill, so that people will not know and will not make the proper financial decisions, but instead will be exposed to a huge tax load for the year 1997. 
That is what Paul Martin wants, so that in February he can brag in his budget speech about how he has cleaned up the deficit - on the backs of the unemployed, on the backs of senior citizens, and on the backs of young people who will be paying the $400 million to the new pension plan.  
Senator Gigantès :
That is because over nine years you did nothing to address the deficit.  
Senator Tkachuk :
That is not true.  
The only reason the federal government is dealing with the situation now is that the minister of finance at the time, Michael Wilson, obtained an agreement that created a certain situation. 
There is a word in law for something from which one cannot extricate oneself, and where a decision must be made. 
That is why they have an agreement today. 
We tried to get it done in 1986.  
Senator Gigantès :
And you failed. 
 He witnessed major events that marked the of this House .
 events witnessed the He that . this House major of marked
 witnessed marked history the that He House of events . major
 the House marked of witnessed that this He history major events
On the occasion of his retirement, we thank him for the many years he gave to the Senate and his country.  
 the to , the we retirement . his On gave many he thank and Senate occasion the country years of his him for
 occasion the of many the thank years the we to country Senate he gave , . and for On his his him retirement
 thank he retirement his the Senate country , the On . years the many of for him occasion to gave we his and
 for of retirement On the his Senate occasion the his we him thank he gave many the . to and years country ,
 the of gave Senate thank he retirement occasion On , we him his his . the the years to and many for country
 retirement and thank for the we his . country On occasion the many , years him to gave of the he his Senate
 we gave he . his retirement Senate him country to the years On and of his for , occasion thank the many the
 occasion On years thank his . many the of for the gave , country the his to and retirement Senate he him we
 On occasion gave he his many his thank the years and retirement him for country we , of Senate to the the .
 and retirement On . occasion his him he , thank many we the his gave to the for years country the Senate of
 years , the his Senate the and occasion country he his we him of On thank . the for many gave to retirement
 . thank Senate to occasion the the of many retirement his and On he country , years his the gave for we him
 the of he Senate thank gave his many to we years him the On country retirement occasion for and , the . his
 the gave his we and many his thank for he the , of retirement occasion to him Senate country On . the years
 On the years country the of gave to his his many thank for retirement , and occasion Senate him the he . we
 many and country the years gave of retirement Senate him his he On for we the the . to thank his , occasion
Given their authorship, I think we have to reflect seriously on these thoughts.  
Before we finally vote, honourable senators, I trust that when the resolution itself is before us we can go into Committee of the Whole to hear any witness who was not heard by the joint committee and whose reflections will guide us. 
In particular, I refer to the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs who, after all, is the sponsor of this resolution on behalf of the Government of Canada. 
He is as well placed as anyone to reply to concerns expressed here and elsewhere. 
I would expect that he would welcome the opportunity to do so before a vote is taken.  
I feel strongly that the minister must share his views with this house and engage in an open and frank exchange directly with its members. 
I urge the leadership on the other side to arrange such a meeting at the earliest opportunity.  
There are still too many unanswered questions and disturbing uncertainties for many senators on both sides of this house to state a firm position at this time. 
The minister should be able to provide assurance, the lack of which so far has caused many of us here to remain hesitant to support this resolution, myself included.  
Hon. Jerahmiel S. Grafstein :
Honourable senators, education is everyone's business. 
When citizens debate their children's education, sometimes passion overwhelms reason.  
It was with some trepidation that I entered the thicket of the Quebec school question, coming as I do from the province of Ontario. 
The dense history of the Quebec school question holds lessons for us all.  
Once appointed to the committee, I set about to better understand the tangled roots of history lying beneath this question, to digest as best I could the numerous articles, studies and especially reports commissioned by successive Quebec governments over the last few years ranging from the articulate Parent commission to the Kenniff report to the findings of the Estates General. 
It became evident to me that a deep and thorough consensus had developed for radical reformation, at least among the elites of Quebec. 
Claude Ryan, an old friend of mine and the then Minister of Education, had galvanized that reform process over a decade ago in Quebec. 
It was equally clear to me that the existing school structures were in desperate need of renovation, particularly in light of the overlapping school structures in Quebec and the financial restraints facing all governments.  
Rather than an historic essay, perhaps it would be simpler if I could share with you my thought processes and the evidence I found as a member of the Standing Senate Committee on the Quebec Resolution Requesting Constitutional Change.  
First, a brief word about committees and their work. 
 the occasion of his retirement , we thank him for the many years he gave to the Senate and his country .
 the . we years to many On and his he the his thank the Senate for , retirement occasion country of gave
 of retirement him many , his . he the occasion country the and the Senate for his thank gave we years to
 country and many his On for occasion Senate the thank , . his the gave we years he the to him retirement
Hon. Normand Grimard :
 . Hon : Grimard Normand
 Normand Hon : . Grimard
 . Normand : Hon Grimard
 Normand . : Hon Grimard
 : Normand Grimard Hon .
 Normand : Grimard Hon .
 Normand Grimard Hon . :
 . Grimard : Normand Hon
 Normand . Hon Grimard :
 : Normand . Hon Grimard
 : Grimard Hon Normand .
 Hon Normand Grimard : .
 . Hon Normand : Grimard
 . Grimard Hon : Normand
 Normand Grimard Hon . :
 . : Hon Grimard Normand
I should like to point out that Manitoba is distinct from Alberta, as are all provinces.  
In their December 1 announcement, the government also revealed that not until 1999 would they be able to provide more detail as to the costs and specific actions that would be required to meet our Kyoto commitments. 
Assuming that it will take some time to implement the actions that the government will propose in 1999, it could be the year 2000, 2001, 2002 or 2003 before the government takes steps to meet its Kyoto targets. 
Some of these actions will undoubtedly entail negotiations and agreements with provincial governments, which means it could be as late as 2006 before the government can meet the targets which were set out.  
Perhaps the Leader of the Government in the Senate could tell us in which year implementation of the Kyoto decisions will begin, because, surely, that must have been taken into consideration prior to the Kyoto meeting.  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Yes, honourable senators, discussions were held, and consideration was given to when the new objectives or conclusions of the Kyoto conference might be put in place, or kick into place, if I may use that terminology.  
I do not believe a final agreement has been reached on that. 
I know that the Government of Canada will cooperate with the provinces and territories and, in partnership with industry, the environmental groups and individual Canadians, develop a practical, flexible, step-by-step plan for reducing emissions. 
Many economic analyses of potential costs attributable to taking action to reduce emissions have been done, but no conclusions have been reached respecting timing or actual costs.  
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Informetrica Study on Meeting Targets-Government Position 
Hon. Mira Spivak :
Honourable senators, late last week, the consulting firm Informetrica released a study entitled, "The Scale of the Challenge for Reducing Canadian Greenhouse Gas Emissions." 
This report states: 
We conclude that there is almost no chance of meeting this goal in Canada under any reasonable economic scenario...  
And I stress this last part: 
...given current commitments to action.  
Could the Leader of the Government tell us if the relevant ministers are aware of this study, whether there have been any responses, or what the reaction has been to this prestigious firm's study?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
It provides very important data. 
 . Normand Grimard :
 . Hon Grimard :
 Hon Normand : .
 Normand Grimard : .
Honourable senators, Senator Guy Charbonneau is a name that reminds me of my introduction to the Senate, all the more so since we were both sworn in on September 27, he in 1979 and I in 1990. 
 of , in a both sworn , reminds the 27 Guy were Senator is September the and all that he Honourable we Senate in to introduction more 1979 in I senators Charbonneau since me on so , . name 1990 my
 . all both Senate 27 , on the in 1990 Honourable of introduction were he 1979 in that September , more and is I sworn reminds Charbonneau so since Guy name Senator , my a we to me in senators the
 of Guy , is both that since 27 the name , he we a I 1990 on sworn the in senators introduction and . to in Senator my in so Charbonneau , 1979 all September me reminds Honourable Senate were more
 the on , introduction that Charbonneau the a were since both and in Senator sworn in Guy he 1979 all in name more reminds . is my I so September 27 of Honourable we me to , Senate 1990 senators ,
 introduction reminds my 1979 Guy , so on and he more is name both Senator that , were Senate the to the all 1990 sworn , in in September we senators Honourable . in 27 I of since me a Charbonneau
 were introduction more in Charbonneau , and so we senators I in 1990 27 since reminds September Guy a Senator all both , is . of 1979 in sworn the the on my me name that to he Honourable Senate ,
 I in introduction the since he that to all my a Guy Senate September senators both on 27 more , so in , of . Senator Honourable 1979 we me the in 1990 is sworn were reminds name Charbonneau and ,
 is . on more and that September since so in 1990 I my name sworn , in in reminds 1979 Guy both the a 27 introduction , Honourable senators , were Senate we me all to the he Charbonneau of Senator
 all name that reminds 1979 introduction my Honourable September in 27 to both Senator more in a Senate , and , we . so is I on since the Guy , of 1990 were Charbonneau me senators the sworn in he
 introduction 1990 my sworn is senators in a I the and of we he name Guy 27 more 1979 on the , since Senator September that Senate both to were . Honourable Charbonneau , in me so reminds in all ,
 , Charbonneau , of Senator sworn more since we my he 1979 in in a reminds and 27 is in senators that 1990 . all on Senate were so I introduction both the Honourable Guy name , me the September to
 name in more senators of in Charbonneau is September 27 so the Senator , Senate . 1990 to 1979 I we , sworn the reminds both introduction in me were on and my , Honourable a since he all that Guy
 I Senator to and Guy both senators , me the reminds a he so on in 1979 since 1990 Charbonneau name of introduction my is , , in were Senate in more . that September 27 all sworn the we Honourable
 more a 1990 the , Charbonneau we 27 reminds 1979 is were both Senator that Honourable all , to he Guy I and . the my sworn Senate in in so name on September senators me of since , in introduction
 in reminds in , all sworn Senate in 1990 the both to a he on Senator since I me name , 1979 Charbonneau Honourable Guy of we my so the , senators that . is more and 27 were introduction September
 he 1990 of . name in in is that introduction my the in a so me I were to , , Charbonneau 1979 on we more , Guy Honourable all Senate senators both sworn reminds and 27 September the Senator since
Honourable senators, is leave granted?  
Senator Kinsella :
It depends upon the answer.  
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, we must make an effort to allow committees to sit. 
They do invite witnesses, many of whom come from out of town. 
We inconvenience them if we are not able to hear from them.  
I must congratulate senators on this side who have refrained, for the most part, from making Senators' Statements on Wednesdays, unless it was something quite urgent, as was Senator Kenny's statement today. 
They have tried to make their speeches on either Tuesdays or Thursdays. 
Senators on the other side have attempted to do the same thing. 
With that level of cooperation, perhaps at some time in the future we can invoke a more formal process whereby there will be some guarantee to committee chairs.  
Barring that formal process, Senator Stewart has witnesses to hear from tomorrow, and I should like him to have permission to hear those witnesses tomorrow.  
Hon. John Lynch-Staunton (Leader of the Opposition) :
That worked for a while. 
Now we have forgotten Mondays, but we have continued on with the practice of having early sittings on Wednesdays. 
As a result, Wednesday has become a normal working session, going on until five or six o'clock. 
The whole purpose of starting the session at 1:30 p.m. has been defeated.  
I do not think it is correct, unless there is an urgency, for committees to sit at the same time as the chamber. 
This is not for appearances' sake, but because the work done here can often be as important in the debates as what goes on in committees. 
At various stages of our work - the introduction of bills, second reading, committee referral, then third reading - we are often doing several at the same time. 
 Honourable senators , Senator Guy Charbonneau is a name that reminds me of my introduction to the Senate , all the more so since we were both sworn on September 27 , he in 1979 and I in 1990 .
 my introduction all both reminds on Charbonneau Guy sworn , in I to and in the were September so . the in Senate he Honourable me we 1990 1979 , more is of name Senator , that a since senators
 sworn senators of more the so in Charbonneau Senator September both that Honourable 27 he since , me in introduction I to and . my a in name , on Senate , the were 1979 we Guy reminds 1990 all
 September all reminds Charbonneau to of in in he the Senator . is since Honourable a both name , introduction my in , more I on we so the Guy were and 27 Senate that sworn senators 1979 1990 ,
For me, it was at a time where, in the Upper House that is revered so much by everyone here, days merged into nights. 
 me by For it in that so , . at nights is here time Upper days House everyone the a was , merged revered into where much ,
 , , by a so . where revered that nights the was For here in it Upper time , me days is House at everyone merged into much
 it so by me For days . time , much Upper a revered House was where here is , in , merged nights at that everyone into the
 by into time revered days For House , Upper much , merged it so that is here in nights the where me was at a . , everyone
 much House revered here where was that so nights Upper me time everyone merged the it at in . is , days For , a by into ,
 it everyone was the where into For , a days merged here in at that much time , revered , nights so me is . House by Upper
 days was , here that is so a House where it by . in much at For , me everyone revered time merged , the nights into Upper
 , House me in into a , time everyone is so Upper much the here that For at , it days merged by nights revered where was .
 is a where , was so House into time much everyone it . merged me Upper , nights that by , the in For here revered at days
 where me everyone the Upper days into , merged a by , at that so revered House time here nights is much was in it . For ,
 into it , is that , time For , me in here where a everyone was so by much nights House days the revered Upper at merged .
 , into nights merged a days that me For , everyone at revered where was time , in is by much it the House here so Upper .
 is House . so merged Upper everyone at days by the in that nights , here time , me it revered much was , a For into where
 much at me Upper here For a is that into , was by nights in merged where the days revered time it . , House , everyone so
 , at was Upper in where , a House that revered time everyone merged . , it is days much For nights so into here the by me
 where in by , . a at was so time revered it merged much here that into is House everyone Upper the For me , nights days ,
Notwithstanding the short time-frames allotted in our terms of reference and as referenced by Senator Lynch-Staunton, the committee clearly heard every viewpoint that people wished to express.  
I hear Senator Wood. 
I will deal with her concerns in a moment.  
While some individual groups did not give evidence, as pointed out by Senator Wood, I concluded that, having examined the materials from those groups, that their viewpoint was indeed expressed by others during the course of those hearings. 
I believe no viewpoint was excluded from our deliberations.  
The time frames in the hearings in no way diminished the committee's ability to obtain or weigh the evidence. 
The committee made a thorough investigation of that evidence. 
No point of view went unexamined, save for one raised by the Reform Party at the last minute, and I will deal with that later.  
Let me for a moment repeat what we heard. 
There was a unanimous resolution, save for two abstentions, from the Quebec assembly. 
We heard from the opposition in the assembly; the Quebec government itself; English and French school boards; Catholic, Protestant and other teachers' groups; archbishops of the Roman Catholic church and the Anglican archbishop of Quebec, which I will deal with later; minority groups including Jewish, Arab, non-Roman Catholic and other allophone groups; students groups, both English and French. 
All agreed that linguistic school boards, which were a direct consequence of this amendment, were desirable and progressive.  
There was some dissent. 
I will briefly touch on it, as did Senator Bolduc in his most insightful speech, especially with respect to the plight of certain French-speaking Protestants and certain English-speaking Catholics. 
There is no question at all that some in those groups feel detrimentally affected.  
Again, under the current Quebec law 109, the notwithstanding clauses had been included, both with respect to the Quebec Charter and the federal Charter of Rights and Freedoms, therefore allowing for denominational teaching to be continued in Quebec. 
How the Quebec government will ultimately continue to afford opportunities for denominational teaching is a much more difficult question to predict. 
However, it is clear to me, from all the evidence I heard and carefully cross-examined, that the majorities of the so-called minorities favoured this change. 
There appeared to be some exceptions at the outset that must be addressed.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
 For me , was at a time where , in the Upper House that is revered so much by everyone here , days merged into nights .
 me days . that , , For here in much revered where time was by so into it , is everyone House at Upper merged nights the
 that is House revered so by the was nights here into For everyone days Upper me at merged much time it where a in , . ,
 For . me , House at , , here everyone time by into that in revered was merged it the Upper where much days a nights so
The Honourable Charbonneau embodied continuity during these weeks and these months where life in the Senate resembled a voyage in troubled waters without life-jackets.  
 without Charbonneau months in resembled . waters where The a voyage life weeks in life troubled - jackets during the these these and Honourable embodied Senate continuity
 embodied Honourable weeks and a troubled continuity without waters The life these . months jackets Charbonneau life the during in where resembled in - these voyage Senate
 . - jackets the in Senate life where The months during waters a weeks without embodied in voyage Honourable Charbonneau troubled and these resembled continuity these life
 the voyage . Honourable life life Senate resembled where continuity in jackets - months weeks The during and in a waters these Charbonneau embodied these troubled without
 in these the a - without . troubled Senate during life Charbonneau continuity where life these months Honourable jackets waters embodied in weeks The voyage resembled and
 where resembled embodied in - months and weeks in during Senate Charbonneau these a Honourable continuity . these the life The jackets voyage waters life without troubled
 voyage and Honourable resembled where - life continuity these in the without waters in Charbonneau embodied life a these months troubled during weeks . The jackets Senate
 in troubled the these Charbonneau - and in weeks Honourable The during a jackets waters continuity . Senate voyage life where life resembled embodied these months without
 resembled weeks waters Senate life in these . months jackets Honourable - The life these where embodied in without during the Charbonneau troubled voyage continuity a and
 these without resembled troubled weeks Senate and The months in Honourable waters voyage where jackets a the these continuity embodied - during life in Charbonneau . life
 in where a life these Senate - life jackets weeks waters troubled and embodied months the continuity these Honourable Charbonneau The in during without . voyage resembled
 during where these . a life these in voyage continuity Charbonneau Honourable jackets weeks embodied the in troubled without months Senate and - The resembled life waters
 - in without Senate continuity weeks these resembled a . life voyage in embodied The waters Honourable these life during Charbonneau where the and months troubled jackets
 the . where Honourable without waters these months during Senate in jackets embodied and resembled The - life continuity these weeks in Charbonneau troubled a voyage life
 jackets The in and during life - voyage resembled where in without months a embodied these the continuity Charbonneau these troubled waters weeks life Senate . Honourable
 Senate The - where a these waters weeks voyage troubled continuity life . these Charbonneau the resembled embodied in Honourable during jackets months without life in and
You cannot do that immediately. 
One needs only consider the situation of Chile. 
Chile is a long, skinny country on the west coast of South America, and I really do believe they have a communications problem there as severe as ours. 
I told honourable senators the story of the finance minister in Chile, going on television every three weeks to a month, and breaking down the new plan into segments, talking to the people, because they all have television, and communicating in that fashion. 
That was the government's way of dealing with it in Chile. 
The only way to communicate is eyeball to eyeball. 
You have to get out and talk to people in their backyards. 
There is no great hurry for this bill to get through, at least not to the degree that you could not do that. 
Why not insist that your government take our committee out there to talk to your people?  
Senator Chalifoux :
We talked to the Conservative government about that for many years and nothing was done.  
Senator Comeau :
We are not in power now. 
You should push your people.  
On motion of Senator Gigantès, debate adjourned.  
Canada Cooperatives Bill 
First Reading 
The Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C-5, respecting cooperatives.  
Bill read first time.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
 The Honourable Charbonneau embodied continuity during these weeks and these months where life in the Senate resembled a voyage in troubled waters without life jackets .
 jackets without the these troubled a where The during waters Senate these life months in weeks resembled . - and Honourable voyage continuity in embodied Charbonneau
 during where these jackets The . the a life in and Honourable Senate waters voyage continuity weeks in these without life embodied months troubled resembled Charbonneau
 waters months the where life Senate life . in troubled The Charbonneau jackets in continuity these embodied these and voyage during resembled - Honourable weeks a
Today, Senator Charbonneau is an ordinary Canadian once again but one to whom this country is indebted for many services. 
 this Charbonneau Today is for . to ordinary is once services but Canadian again indebted country an Senator whom one many ,
 Canadian indebted ordinary to one many Today for is but again whom Charbonneau services , this . is an Senator country once
 services Senator again ordinary indebted one is Today this to but whom country an , once Charbonneau many . for Canadian is
 ordinary services country , Canadian to again many but Today indebted an is is for whom this one Senator . Charbonneau once
 is Today Charbonneau to again for one ordinary . indebted many this country , an is services but once Canadian whom Senator
 , to Canadian Senator is ordinary many . country whom this but again one indebted for services Charbonneau is an once Today
 country Charbonneau many this is to Senator but an once for ordinary Canadian whom Today again , one services indebted . is
 to Canadian . many is Charbonneau this but ordinary again whom an , is for one indebted Senator country services once Today
 country again this Charbonneau Canadian is many indebted once an Today Senator , one whom but ordinary to for services . is
 Charbonneau . ordinary whom services for once is Canadian this country an , Today but one is many to again Senator indebted
 Senator . again Today once Canadian one ordinary country to an for indebted but many is , services this whom is Charbonneau
 Charbonneau Today . for an , but ordinary to this one many Canadian is once whom indebted country is again services Senator
 one Senator again Today many country Canadian for but to this whom . once ordinary is Charbonneau is indebted an services ,
 , Canadian an many . this once to Today for ordinary Charbonneau Senator is whom country indebted one again but services is
 but indebted Senator country , Charbonneau for services whom is many again this Canadian is to ordinary Today . an one once
 for to country an , this once Today many Senator services ordinary Canadian . is one indebted whom is but again Charbonneau
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this bill be read the third time?  
On motion of Senator Kirby, bill placed on the Orders of the Day for third reading at the next sitting of the Senate.  
Present State and Future of Agriculture 
Report of Agriculture and Forestry Committee Tabled 
Hon. Leonard J. Gustafson :
Honourable senators, I have the honour to table the second report of the Standing Senate Committee on Agriculture and Forestry, which requests that the committee be empowered to incur special expenses pursuant to the Procedural Guidelines for the Financial Operation of Senate Committees .  
I ask that this report be printed as an appendix to the Journals of the Senate of this day.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is it agreed, honourable senators?  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this report be taken into consideration?  
On motion of Senator Gustafson, report placed on the Orders the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate.  
Present State and Future of Forestry 
Report of Agriculture and Forestry Committee Tabled 
Hon. Leonard J. Gustafson :
Honourable senators, I have the honour to table the third report of the Standing Senate Committee on Agriculture and Forestry, with a request that the committee be empowered to incur special expenses pursuant to the Procedural Guidelines for the Financial Operation of Senate Committees .  
I ask that the report be printed as an appendix to the Journals of the Senate of this day.  
 Today , Senator Charbonneau is an ordinary Canadian once again but one to whom this country is indebted for many services
 Senator Canadian again , is an services . Today Charbonneau ordinary but once indebted for to one many country is whom
 Charbonneau Senator indebted services , one once country to this many but again an is . Canadian ordinary is for Today
 is ordinary services once country Today , for an Canadian . indebted but whom this many Charbonneau again Senator to is
An astute business person, he led a number of trade missions abroad and was equally successful in hosting a great many other missions. 
 business many successful and led abroad a of An great other equally number a person missions he trade missions astute hosting in . , was
 person , many a successful of and other missions led number business An missions astute great in abroad equally trade hosting a . was he
 missions trade . missions and was a abroad led other business number of person hosting astute great An successful equally , many a in he
 . other missions a successful business equally he hosting , led in abroad a person trade and many astute great An was missions of number
 An a and a of he was hosting abroad trade person business , many number equally other led missions successful missions . great astute in
 of successful and other led he many great in was a An a abroad person astute trade missions equally business number . missions hosting ,
 in a other trade led missions missions hosting abroad equally great and successful An many was number person he of , . astute a business
 of great . business equally missions person successful missions astute , many a he An abroad hosting and in led was number trade other a
 astute hosting missions trade and other a equally great was a led An in , number of business many successful abroad missions he person .
 a missions led person successful other in missions . and business An abroad number great equally trade , was many hosting he a astute of
 in was hosting great missions of other a business successful equally missions trade person , a and . many An astute number led he abroad
 was in business number many person missions great of astute . and a equally a other trade abroad , successful hosting missions An led he
 of a equally missions led number trade astute . was , and successful hosting great a An many business abroad person in missions he other
 great he number in missions , business astute equally other successful . led trade abroad An hosting person a missions and a of many was
 a other business person was many of successful trade number An astute , missions equally . a missions he abroad great led in hosting and
 number he great successful many hosting missions equally and An missions business led of . was a astute trade person other in a , abroad
Forestry 
Demolition of Government Laboratories-Possibility of Restoration of Funding-Government Position 
(Response to question raised by Hon. Mira Spivak on November 20, 1997) 
In response to the federal government's Program Review, the Canadian Forest Service (CFS) underwent strategic restructuring to rationalize its operations and to reduce infrastructure costs in the interest of providing maximum funding to research within the context of a reduced operating budget. 
As a consequence, Petawawa National Forest Institute (PNFI) was identified as one of the several Natural Resources Canada (NRCan) operations to be closed as part of a redefined departmental initiative to refocus our Science and Technology (S&T) programs. 
These programs address issues of national and international significance and service our clients through stronger, more effective partnerships with the provinces, industry and other players in the forest sector. 
All the major programs from PNFI have been transferred to the five current CFS research Centres and accordingly the majority of basic research activities from PNFI are ongoing. 
Claims of expenditure for upgrades prior to decommissioning were in fact for operational maintenance, purchase of equipment and some site enhancements. 
With the closure of the site all research equipment and transportable assets relevant to ongoing program activities have been moved to other CFS research Centres with their respective researcher's programs.  
The final phase of deconstruction has been delayed twice in order to seek alternate tenants for the townsite. 
The site in its current state represents a safety risk both in terms of security and liability and requires significant annual expenditures for heating and infrastructure to simply be maintained.  
Answers to Order Paper Questions Tabled 
Energy-Department of the Environment-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) table the answer to Question No. 13 on the Order Paper-by Senator Kenny.  
Energy-Department of Justice-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) table the answer to Question No. 26 on the Order Paper-by Senator Kenny.  
Energy-Department of Multiculturalism-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) table the answer to Question No. 31 on the Order Paper-by Senator Kenny.  
Energy-Department of Natural Resources-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) table the answer to Question No. 34 on the Order Paper-by Senator Kenny.  
 An astute business person , he a number of trade missions abroad and was equally successful in hosting a great many other missions .
 he business , led and missions person number many An was a a great astute trade equally abroad of . other successful hosting missions
 was hosting in of and astute led successful number a missions other many great , An business person missions he abroad a . trade
 number many equally a and astute in abroad successful a person other he . great led hosting missions missions of was , trade business
Without his exceptional insight, a great many projects would never have seen the light of day. 
 Without projects light . have a exceptional seen day of many never insight , the his would great
 exceptional great Without a the light , many projects insight seen . his never would have day of
 Without would a day projects the his exceptional . many have , great light never insight seen of
 light have Without exceptional seen a projects of never great many insight . his would day , the
 . never many of a insight his projects have exceptional the Without light seen , day would great
 have , many exceptional his never of seen day great the Without . insight a light would projects
 great insight . light projects his never the Without would of have seen a day many , exceptional
 , the have his would exceptional great of many a light projects day seen never insight Without .
 great , light insight of a many projects have never would seen the . day exceptional his Without
 his light seen insight never have the Without , day exceptional great of a many projects . would
 light projects seen day the exceptional never Without . would great insight many , his a have of
 his projects seen insight a day light Without . exceptional great the , have of never would many
 his great insight a . exceptional of day have light the Without projects many seen never , would
 Without exceptional the seen insight many never light projects . would day great , have his a of
 would have light his many the Without day exceptional projects a , . of seen never great insight
 great the day have many exceptional seen Without of a projects insight , . would his light never
I will not delve too far into the OAS because there are other speakers who wish to deal with this issue over the next two weeks. 
Perhaps we, as senators, will be able to discuss this matter well into the new year, which I hope we do.  
Senator Gigantès :
You are reading from the wrong script.  
Senator Taylor :
It is obvious that my honourable friend does not have any notes.  
Senator Tkachuk :
I think I am getting to honourable senators opposite.  
I was told by the Honourable Senator Kirby that members opposite would only have one speaker on this issue. 
I have a feeling that we may hear from a few more senators after I and other senators point out some of the weaknesses in Bill C-2.  
Honourable senators, I would reiterate that this is not a pension program: this is a payroll tax! 
In the past, it harboured cheap loans for provinces, and it will harbour a $100-billion fund that will grow to a $1-trillion fund. 
Honourable senators, we will not need to pay the price. 
We will be long gone before the young people who starting out now, and who expect a pension plan when they grow old, will reap the benefits of what we sow today.  
Honourable senators on this side and honourable senators on the other side, I do not know why you would want to rush this bill. 
What is in it for you? 
What is in it for the Minister of Finance? 
What is in it for anyone to rush this bill through Parliament by December 19? 
No reasonable explanation has been given to me, and I am sure no reasonable explanation has been given to my honourable friends, other than the PMO, Mr. Goldenberg and Mr. Martin, telling you to pass this bill by December 19. 
They are telling you not to think about the consequences, because they are right. 
 Without his exceptional insight , a great many projects would never have seen the light of .
 . exceptional never have seen projects , many of light insight a the would his Without great
 light his great Without , exceptional of . insight never seen the many have day would a
 great day insight a , never of his . projects exceptional would the Without light many seen
Canada is, without question, indebted to him for a number of overseas contracts. 
 of number is for Canada . , without , question contracts a him to overseas indebted
 number contracts question Canada indebted , without him . to is a overseas of for ,
 indebted for contracts overseas is him without , . , to of number Canada a question
 . question him overseas , Canada of indebted a without contracts , for is to number
 overseas question contracts is indebted for , of , number . him Canada a to without
 overseas number question of a indebted for , him is to without contracts . Canada ,
 for a , indebted , him contracts . without number overseas question to Canada of is
 for him is overseas , Canada indebted number to of . contracts , question without a
 . Canada question indebted , contracts to , without overseas for is number a of him
 is a question number to Canada , indebted overseas him of contracts without , . for
 , is to for , number without a overseas Canada . contracts question him indebted of
 Canada without number for . , question overseas contracts to , him indebted of a is
 question Canada him a . number , overseas to indebted , of for is without contracts
 for Canada , number of . is indebted question contracts without a to overseas him ,
 without question , contracts number a Canada indebted for of . overseas , to him is
 to contracts overseas of , number a , question without Canada . him indebted for is
Senator Taylor :
Elect the Liberals and it will be high!  
Senator Tkachuk :
If we elect the Liberals, inflation will be high? 
We already know that! 
Let me continue in that vein. 
Perhaps honourable senators opposite do not want to hear what Paul Martin will be doing, and the explaining that you will have to do back home in 10 or 15 years when your children ask you what you did about this bill. 
When they retire, their CPP benefits will be worth about what they put in, plus 2.5 per cent.  
I do not get it. 
I do not understand why we are being asked to do that to our children, so that those who are retiring today can receive full benefits and those who are retiring soon can get their benefits. 
I do not get it. 
I will try to explain it today, and - I hope I can convince you.  
The CPP is part of a larger program that Paul Martin is introducing. 
Everything involves reform. 
We will have a reform of the Old Age Security benefit, which is coming up after Christmas. 
It is important to get through this before Christmas so that we can consider changes in the cut-backs that will come due after Christmas. 
We on this side think that both matters should be discussed together because it is part of a pension program and a part of a social security net for people in this country who retire at 65 and who want to retire with some dignity.  
We strongly believe that this measure is a payroll tax and a job killer. 
Yesterday, Senator Kirby said it was not a payroll tax. 
The Department of Finance did a study in April 1995 which was reported in The Toronto Star . 
 Canada is , without question , to him for a number of overseas contracts .
 of contracts Canada a , overseas him for , number without is question to indebted
 overseas for , , a him is to . Canada without question contracts of indebted
 him overseas contracts a Canada for . question to of , is number indebted ,
Without his intervention, many of these new markets would have been conquered by other countries.  
 would Without intervention his by have new . these markets been many countries , conquered of other
 markets intervention these would conquered . his other of have , countries by been Without many new
 by Without markets these other conquered been new many countries , his . have would intervention of
 other new these have been markets intervention would . of countries many his by , conquered Without
 intervention , conquered have of markets countries many Without other . by would these been his new
 other new conquered Without by markets of countries many his have intervention would , . these been
 Without , these by his other . of been markets many countries intervention new have would conquered
 conquered of countries new , would have markets by intervention other many these Without been . his
 intervention countries by many , conquered markets new his . of these other would Without been have
 would of . have been markets his by other , countries Without many conquered new these intervention
 would his intervention , been these by of other conquered new . many countries markets have Without
 Without these intervention . markets been his countries by have new , of many would conquered other
 have markets conquered of been by would these Without countries new his , . intervention other many
 markets countries been new of , these many other conquered Without his by have . intervention would
 conquered , of would by Without been these new many have markets countries . other intervention his
 been would conquered , these intervention of markets by his Without . have new many other countries
On behalf of all senators and the Senate, I bid you welcome.  
SENATORS' STATEMENTS 
The Senate 
Response to Newspaper Article on Senator's Residency Qualifications 
Hon. Colin Kenny :
Honourable senators, I rise today on behalf of a colleague who cannot be present, Senator Paul Lucier. 
Senator Lucier has sent me a fax which he has asked me to communicate to the chamber. 
For your benefit, he wants me to reply to the comments made about him in the media recently.  
He writes: 
I would like to make some points with respect to this matter: 
The Citizen said: "Paul Lucier said the Senate's legal staff approved his change in residency five years ago when he moved to Vancouver."  
Senator Lucier says: 
This is not true. 
I never spoke with legal staff five years ago about this. 
I never had any problem about residency.  
2. The Citizen said: "He said Senate staff told him he could keep his seat as long as he continues to own property in the Yukon."  
Senator Lucier replies: 
Again, I never spoke to the staff and was therefore never told any such comment. 
On my attendance, 21 % (19 out of 87 sittings), and on the statement: "He says - 
Senator Lucier has underlined the word "says."  
 Without his intervention , many of new markets would have been conquered by other countries .
 his many by intervention countries been Without these of conquered would . , markets new have
 have countries these other Without would conquered many by . his of been markets , new
 other have of many new countries Without conquered intervention by markets his . been , would
Senator Charbonneau has a very personal sense of modesty and an even deeper sense of friendship. 
 modesty of Charbonneau and has deeper . a sense personal friendship sense Senator even an very of
 personal even and sense Charbonneau very . an of deeper modesty has Senator a of friendship sense
 and very deeper Charbonneau of . personal sense sense an modesty friendship a of has Senator even
 modesty very Charbonneau of friendship has of a deeper sense an personal sense even Senator and .
 and sense . of a has modesty even Senator sense friendship an deeper Charbonneau very of personal
 even sense has a deeper of and . personal Senator of Charbonneau very friendship modesty sense an
 an has even a sense very and personal sense Charbonneau friendship Senator modesty deeper of of .
 personal friendship an very deeper Senator even of Charbonneau has of . sense modesty sense a and
 . even has sense of modesty very Senator Charbonneau friendship personal sense an and deeper of a
 of has friendship Senator deeper even a personal Charbonneau of modesty very sense an and sense .
 deeper friendship very an even and has sense Charbonneau a Senator of personal modesty sense of .
 sense deeper sense even a an Charbonneau of very Senator modesty of and has friendship personal .
 an even very of sense Senator deeper and modesty . of Charbonneau sense friendship has personal a
 an modesty of deeper of Senator friendship Charbonneau and personal . sense a even has sense very
 modesty deeper even Senator and sense a of . friendship has an of sense very Charbonneau personal
 Charbonneau very and sense personal a . an of has sense friendship even deeper of modesty Senator
Certainly a golden opportunity was lost to give Canada a basic law more in tune with modern Canadian society, except for the adoption of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 
Even it is not without its flaws, not the least being the notwithstanding clause which can be subjected to abuse. 
Perhaps all of this is a reflection of the one constant which has marked Canada since its origins, a country identified by its extraordinary political and social diversity and contradictions.  
In any event, we are faced with a request from the Quebec National Assembly to be removed from the obligations to maintain formal Catholic and Protestant school structures in the cities of Montreal and Quebec City and to maintain minority or dissentient Catholic and Protestant schools outside those areas at the request of minority Catholic or Protestant parents, as the case may be. 
Provincial legislation to establish linguistic schools is already being put into effect. 
These can be established without amending section 93. 
Quebec, however, points out that to have multiple school systems can only lead to overlapping, duplication, and confusion, with all their attendant additional costs.  
In addition, religious education as provided for in section 93 is reconfirmed in the province's Education Act, which by itself may be reassuring at first glance, but not in reality as it is a protection which is simply not as iron-clad as a constitutional guarantee.  
When the Education Act, Bill 107, was passed in 1994, the National Assembly agreed to apply the notwithstanding clause so that the privileges given to denominations in section 93 could not be successfully challenged under the Charter. 
Notwithstanding clauses expire every five years and this one is up in 1999. Will it be re-enacted? 
The Parti Québécois, in opposition, voted against it at the time. 
The two ministers who appeared before the joint committee would not reveal their party's position, preferring to await a broad consultation before stating it. 
An uninformed guess, however, leads me to believe that, if the Parti Québécois still forms the government two years hence, the notwithstanding clause will not be renewed, thereby leading to the gradual removal of Catholic and Protestant teaching in public schools as we know it today.  
In rebuttal to this, many will point to a letter sent to the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs by the Bishop of Baie-Comeau on behalf of the Assembly of Quebec Bishops. 
It is dated September 30, 1997, and appears as Appendix H in the joint committee report. 
In it, Bishop Morissette repeats the assembly's approval for the establishment of linguistic school boards, but he also adds an important caveat which was only given passing mention in the report itself. 
The letter states: 
Our approval for changing the status of school boards has always been accompanied by one condition: that the denominational guarantees established in Bill 107 be maintained.  
The Anglican Bishop of Montreal, in a letter dated November 3, 1997, to the same minister, and included in the report as Appendix I, wrote as follows: 
...we...favour the creation of linguistic school boards and the establishment of a non-denominational educational system which respects the choice of parents to require that their children receive religious and moral education in conformity with their beliefs.  
 Senator Charbonneau has a very personal of modesty and an even deeper sense of friendship .
 even sense an and deeper friendship of Charbonneau a modesty very has sense personal Senator of
 a Senator modesty of has friendship personal sense sense of . an even Charbonneau very and
 deeper and a of of very even sense . an personal modesty has Charbonneau friendship sense
I dare believe he will hold today's remarks against me. 
 . remarks against dare will s me ' hold I believe he today
 me he remarks . believe ' today I hold against dare will s
 dare I against hold believe ' remarks s me he today . will
 . today ' s will dare believe me against hold I he remarks
 against remarks believe hold s I . he will today me ' dare
 I believe will today . he hold s against dare me remarks '
 . will ' believe remarks he s hold me against dare today I
 today remarks he hold ' believe against . dare s me I will
 will . believe remarks dare I he against s me hold today '
 he hold against will remarks s ' today me believe I dare .
 against s I ' me . remarks dare today hold will believe he
 . against he s I ' dare believe today hold me will remarks
 hold he remarks s believe . will today against ' me dare I
 hold I against dare believe remarks me s ' he . today will
 will against s . remarks today ' me I believe dare he hold
 dare me he . I will today s hold against believe remarks '
I will try to explain it today, and - I hope I can convince you.  
The CPP is part of a larger program that Paul Martin is introducing. 
Everything involves reform. 
We will have a reform of the Old Age Security benefit, which is coming up after Christmas. 
It is important to get through this before Christmas so that we can consider changes in the cut-backs that will come due after Christmas. 
We on this side think that both matters should be discussed together because it is part of a pension program and a part of a social security net for people in this country who retire at 65 and who want to retire with some dignity.  
We strongly believe that this measure is a payroll tax and a job killer. 
Yesterday, Senator Kirby said it was not a payroll tax. 
The Department of Finance did a study in April 1995 which was reported in The Toronto Star . 
The study noted that the relatively modest increase of CPP premiums between 1986 and 1993 resulted in 26,000 fewer jobs. 
It further noted that the increases have had and will continue to have a negative impact on the labour force. 
That contradicts the government's arguments that CPP premiums are not a payroll tax but, rather, a pension contribution. 
In their own report, the Department of Finance stated that employers' contributions to CPP and the Quebec Pension Plan are part of the compulsory payroll tax. 
The department warned against higher payroll taxes in that same report and called this tax just that, namely, a payroll tax.  
We on this side strongly believe there are a number of important issues contained in this bill that we should discuss before it is passed. 
There should be decreases in other taxes, perhaps other payroll taxes such as the employment insurance payroll tax, to make up for the increases in the CPP, so that the negative impact on jobs will not be felt as strongly.  
We should have a full evaluation of any changes to the Old Age Security system and how it will affect future incentives to save. 
The Auditor General should have free access not only to the fund but also to the board itself, lifting the limits on RRSP contributions so that people can have an opportunity to look after themselves, and removing the foreign investment restrictions on RRSP investments.  
Honourable senators, there are elements of truth in all things nefarious. 
That is why we call it propaganda. 
 I believe he will hold today ' s remarks against me .
 today against me will dare believe s ' hold remarks he .
 he me I hold against . s believe ' remarks today dare
 remarks today against ' I me he . dare s believe will
I know he has always been very protective of his private life.  
 been of private I know always life protective has his . very he
 been private his know he I life always very . of protective has
 know of has been I life private protective very . always his he
 protective . know his very life has been always I private he of
 he life has protective private I his know . always been of very
 . know life been I protective of private always his he has very
 of know always life he private has protective his been very . I
 . always has very I been life of his he know private protective
 life always his very has been he . of private know I protective
 know private life I been of his . always protective has he very
 has life very been private he protective . know I his always of
 he . very of I life know been always has his private protective
 I very has . of know private always protective life he his been
 his I been very life know always private has of protective . he
 protective know been I his . of always has life private very he
 I very always been protective life of . know has he his private
As soon as they got their grubby hands on the cash, it was lent to the provinces at favourable interest rates. 
They were cheating Canadians who trusted that when they got old, they would have a pension. 
Baby boomers, who have paid all their working lives since the program's inception, now have the audacity to reach 50. 
We have had the audacity to reach 50!  
Senator Cools :
Not me.  
Senator Tkachuk :
Then they had the gall to limit their breeding, thus causing a situation whereby, 15 years from now, there will be fewer people working to pay for the people who turn 65 at that time. 
They limited their breeding. 
From what we know of social behaviour during the 1970s, abstinence was not the order of the day. 
People were, shall I say, "fuddling". 
It was not their fault; it was the fault of scientists. 
The cause, they say, was social behaviour. 
That is what caused the end of this pension plan. 
It is one other social plan gone astray. 
The good old days are gone.  
We have another problem. 
People live longer. 
Again, science has interfered with a social plan. 
Retiring at age 65, dropping dead three to six years later, depending on your gender, was good for governments. 
 I know he has always been protective of his private life .
 he very of I his has know private protective . always been
 . has he always of know very I private been protective life
 his been life know very always protective I of has he .
Parliamentarian Charbonneau has not only been Speaker in the Senate for nine years, which is a record in itself, but also an extraordinary ambassador for our economy, both for job creation and investment. 
 for nine record investment job , been Speaker not both for ambassador the but for and . itself also , has an Parliamentarian in , years economy our which Senate is extraordinary in creation only Charbonneau a
 nine job has been is for , our Speaker an also . for itself which , for record years Charbonneau in in but a Parliamentarian not extraordinary the both investment creation economy , only Senate and ambassador
 both an economy a not Parliamentarian Charbonneau for , , record the for has Speaker ambassador only Senate creation also and nine in our been which years is . , itself job for but investment extraordinary in
 but record creation economy extraordinary Speaker and also itself only in . which , years nine in not an investment , ambassador Charbonneau our for , been for Parliamentarian a job is the Senate has both for
 Charbonneau but both , been in the also only our and Parliamentarian extraordinary , job nine investment years is not creation which record for Senate itself for Speaker a in an has economy , ambassador for .
 Senate which Parliamentarian has both itself Speaker a extraordinary ambassador for an investment been in not for , our and nine years is but only , , in record creation . also job economy for the Charbonneau
 the which also in but Charbonneau our been Speaker years . for a and itself ambassador has Senate is , not Parliamentarian for , record for , extraordinary in an job economy investment nine creation only both
 the nine economy , in years itself Senate for job not record only is creation also ambassador a Speaker in our Parliamentarian but investment for , has which been . , and for an Charbonneau extraordinary both
 for . in years , also creation been but job has and itself our the Parliamentarian is record , a for Charbonneau in both nine which extraordinary economy Senate ambassador for not an Speaker investment , only
 itself economy years Parliamentarian for . Senate nine is creation not ambassador been in , Charbonneau the , record Speaker an in but investment has both also and for , our for job extraordinary which a only
 been record nine both our Senate , extraordinary only which itself Charbonneau for an years has for creation is in , ambassador job in Speaker the investment a also economy for , and . Parliamentarian not but
 Parliamentarian has Senate job and nine , extraordinary investment in is both record our an but itself years a ambassador not economy the also only which creation Charbonneau for been for . , Speaker in for ,
 , years , Charbonneau nine an has also only investment in and for not , a is both the itself been Speaker job but ambassador for Senate in . creation extraordinary which economy for Parliamentarian record our
 for economy nine both extraordinary is only in the , Charbonneau investment for a an also itself creation our and for Parliamentarian , not ambassador in Speaker which has record . years been , but job Senate
 economy job , only creation record also , the for Speaker which in . is an a ambassador nine but our , extraordinary Charbonneau for itself has and not years in Senate both for Parliamentarian been investment
 for itself Parliamentarian a for our extraordinary Senate creation Charbonneau for been years but , not Speaker in investment record both . is also and in job , only economy ambassador has the an , nine which
The amendments proposed to Article 93 by the Quebec government, which would remove the obligation for the Quebec government to have confessional school boards, seems reasonable to us and in keeping with traditional positions enunciated by the Anglican church.  
Honourable senators, the senior representatives of the mainstream Roman Catholic and Protestant groups did not register their opposition to these changes. 
This does not mean that this exercise was one of perfection. 
Indeed, many of us remain unhappy and regret the federal government's position taken with 23(1)( a ) then and now. 
I share, with Senator Pitfield and others, concern in that respect. 
However, unfortunately, I have a memory, and I recall very well that the 1982 Constitution, for which Senator Pitfield was a senior federal advisor, was a minimalist not a maximalist document. 
It was Senator Pitfield and others in power at the time who determined that, in order to pass the 1982 Constitution, the Province of Quebec should be given the option of proclaiming section 23(1)( a ) and that the notwithstanding clause would be incorporated in the 1982 Constitution to eviscerate the charter, both serious sources of our current distress.  
Many of us objected strenuously then, and do now, to giving the Province of Quebec these options. 
However, that is history. 
Many of us objected to the notwithstanding clause pressed by the other provinces, particularly Manitoba. 
Senator Pitfield was there. 
He understood that. 
This I remember.  
However flawed the 1982 Constitution was with regard to these two aspects, the special joint committee shared a defining moment. 
For the first time since 1982, two ministers from the Province of Quebec have appeared before a special joint committee of Parliament in Ottawa and have, in public hearings, given de facto and de jure recognition to the 1982 Constitution. 
Pluralism and the new demographics was the dialectic that we heard emanating from the Bloc members. 
They talked about pluralism - for the very first time. 
Surely, with patience, good ideas can have great roots and can grow great and mighty trees.  
However, members of the Reform Party, who proclaim equality across the land as a benchmark of their political theology, could not see their way fit to resolve the inequality as presented by section 93 when the opportunity presented itself.  
Honourable senators, I fully support the report and the federal resolution. 
 Charbonneau has not only been Speaker in the Senate for nine years , which is a record in itself , but also an extraordinary ambassador for our economy , both for job creation and investment .
 nine Charbonneau investment which and in extraordinary , the years but Senate for been Parliamentarian both has for , Speaker economy . ambassador in itself also job an not only for a record creation our ,
 both itself also for ambassador in is , an our in for Parliamentarian Speaker which has years creation investment only been extraordinary record nine not for , Senate job Charbonneau a . the but , and
 in Charbonneau Parliamentarian Senate , extraordinary . Speaker nine in itself has a , for been but creation and our years , an for the is both job which not economy record for investment only ambassador
He has played his role well. 
 He played . well has role his
 He his well . has played role
 his He has played role well .
 He has . role well his played
 well role has He played his .
 He well his has . role played
 role well his He has . played
 well played role has his . He
 . his well He played role has
 played well role has He . his
 has . He well his role played
 well role played has his . He
 has He played his . role well
 his He has well role played .
 played role his He has . well
 his . played He has well role
Honourable senators, when shall this report be taken into consideration?  
On motion of Senator Gustafson, report placed on the Orders the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate.  
Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration 
Seventh Report of Committee Presented 
Hon. Bill Rompkey , Chair of the Standing Committee on Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration, presented the following report: 
Tuesday, December 9, 1997 
The Standing Committee on Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration has the honour to present its 
SEVENTH REPORT 
Your Committee notes the attendance record of Senator Thompson and recommends that, effective immediately: 
Senator Thompson's use of the Senate resources ordinarily made available to him for the carrying out of his parliamentary functions, including funds, goods, services and premises, be suspended; 
2. Senator Thompson's allowances for travel and telecommunications expenses be suspended, with the exception of his expenses for travel between his place of residence in Ontario and the Senate in Ottawa; and 
3. Senator Thompson may apply in person to have this decision varied to the Standing Committee on Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration, which the Committee has the authority to do.  
Your Committee, in conjunction with the Standing Committee on Privileges, Standing Rules and Orders, is continuing to study this issue.  
Respectfully submitted, 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this report be taken into consideration?  
On motion of Senator Rompkey, report placed on the Orders of the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate.  
ADJOURNMENT 
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58(1) h ), I move, seconded by the Honourable Senator De Bané: 
 He has his role well .
 has his He well . played
 He played . his role has
 He his . role has well
I think he has carried out his mandate with a determination that is equal to the pride he takes in all he does. 
 does in with he that determination he all his pride takes has is equal he I carried . to think a out the mandate
 he with think has equal he in I that the determination takes his carried all out mandate pride is he to does . a
 out a . equal all the mandate pride with carried determination think that he I has does his he he to in takes is
 he with carried think equal pride mandate out . to does he the his all a he in takes determination has that is I
 all I takes carried with out he . pride does determination has mandate is that a the equal he in to he his think
 to with has pride I in that he think the he determination out he . a is his all carried mandate takes equal does
 . he has all I carried to the mandate his he in that pride is determination takes think does he equal a out with
 he to takes pride does equal with . he all carried mandate out think that his determination has he in I a the is
 that all he the takes think he out carried determination with has pride to his is he mandate does . equal I in a
 think he all I his takes that carried a . the determination in mandate out to he does is pride he has equal with
 takes that carried in determination think is his to . a equal he he I has mandate does pride he the with out all
 . I his in he out with takes is mandate has determination equal does he pride think he a carried that all the to
 is with carried takes in pride has does think his the equal a mandate to he he he all out determination that . I
 a his equal . does pride out he carried has with is that the to determination in think he I all takes he mandate
 he determination in that does pride he he . his equal I think to mandate carried the all with out takes a is has
 he the that with I carried he mandate pride all equal takes out does determination he . think is in to a has his
We have 30 in the inventory.  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, the answer is yes, there are 30 helicopters in the inventory. 
As I indicated yesterday, 24 were cleared, and six remain to be inspected. 
They will be inspected by December 18.  
Of the 24 that were inspected, only two were found to be in need of repair. 
As to precisely where the other six are located, I would need to consult with the appropriate authorities at National Defence. 
I will bring forward an answer for my honourable friend.  
Senator Forrestall :
Was there any criticism from our NATO allies with respect to the grounding of these aircraft? 
My understanding is that these aircraft are at sea, and a number of them are engaged in some training exercises. 
Were we criticized for not being able to live up to our obligations?  
Senator Graham :
Not to my knowledge. 
It is my understanding that those helicopters are at sea on exercises. 
As to precisely where they are, on whatever ocean, I cannot positively say. 
It might be a military secret, as a matter of fact.  
Federal-Provincial Relations 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Atlantic Provinces Equal to Increase in Social Transfers-Government Position 
Hon. Brenda M. Robertson :
 I think he has carried out his mandate with a determination is equal to the pride he takes in all he does .
 mandate he has takes he that think all in pride is a does to with equal the out . I determination his carried
 takes he all mandate does has that he . a equal determination to with think is the his carried he I out pride
 he he determination with that the he his is does a all equal mandate . to I has pride in out carried think
Honourable Senator Charbonneau has now moved to a quieter life. 
 to life . now has moved a quieter Honourable Charbonneau Senator
 life Senator has Charbonneau to now a . moved Honourable quieter
 moved Senator a Charbonneau quieter . now to Honourable has life
 life has Honourable now quieter Charbonneau to Senator . a moved
 . now has quieter moved Senator life Charbonneau a to Honourable
 moved a Senator to . has Honourable now life Charbonneau quieter
 Honourable Senator life . moved now quieter Charbonneau a to has
 Charbonneau now a quieter Honourable has . to life moved Senator
 life quieter Charbonneau . now a has Senator to moved Honourable
 Senator Honourable moved quieter a Charbonneau . now life has to
 a . has moved quieter Honourable to Charbonneau life Senator now
 moved a has now Honourable life Senator Charbonneau quieter . to
 a to has Honourable . life Charbonneau Senator now quieter moved
 to now has a Senator Honourable life quieter moved . Charbonneau
 life moved Charbonneau . to a now Honourable Senator has quieter
 now quieter Honourable life Senator . to a has moved Charbonneau
The amendments provided for the elimination of CPP children's benefits which previously applied - they changed it again - where more than four children of a deceased or disabled contributor had been eligible for such benefits. 
Now, if you have more than four kids, that is fine, too. 
However, it was another increased cost to what should be a pension plan. 
The government should have taken the money out of something else, or increased the amount of CPP premiums so that people were told the truth, and also told, "To pay for this it will cost you 10 cents or 20 cents more a month." 
The cash was there, so they used that cash.  
Legislation was enacted for spousal credits. 
When people get divorced, they have to keep up with the times. 
They can split the benefits. 
That was not done before. 
At the inception of this program, that was not allowed.  
Because men die earlier and women live longer, the money went mostly to women. 
It costs more money. 
I am not saying that is bad. 
I am just saying that all of a sudden it costs more money because women are either lucky or live better or cleaner lives than men, and they live longer.  
Senator Gigantès :
They survive us. 
It takes strength and intelligence.  
Senator Moore :
Meaning we are not intelligent?  
Senator Gigantès :
 Honourable Senator Charbonneau now moved to a quieter life .
 now Senator to life moved Charbonneau a . Honourable has
 life Charbonneau moved to a quieter Honourable . has Senator
 has Senator now life Charbonneau Honourable moved to a quieter
Like myself, Guy Charbonneau has always been faithful to the Progressive Conservative Party. 
 Progressive has Charbonneau , myself always Conservative faithful been . the Guy Party to Like
 to faithful myself the Party been always Like . has Conservative Guy , Progressive Charbonneau
 myself Conservative . Like Party to faithful Guy the been always Progressive has Charbonneau ,
 has Conservative Progressive . been Guy faithful Like Party myself always Charbonneau , to the
 Progressive Like faithful . Charbonneau to Party been has , myself Conservative always the Guy
 been Conservative . Guy Progressive faithful Party Charbonneau the to , Like myself has always
 has , myself Charbonneau faithful Guy always Party Like been . Progressive to Conservative the
 , has faithful Conservative myself been Party Charbonneau Guy Progressive to the Like always .
 been . Guy Party faithful the Like Conservative Progressive to always , myself Charbonneau has
 always faithful Guy been Conservative Like the . , myself Charbonneau has Progressive to Party
 . always myself the to Like , Conservative has Guy faithful Charbonneau been Party Progressive
 , Like been myself always Progressive Guy faithful Charbonneau to has the . Party Conservative
 the Charbonneau myself Like Conservative , Guy always faithful Progressive has Party to . been
 Party Guy Like myself Conservative the Charbonneau to , always . faithful has Progressive been
 faithful always Guy myself has Party , . Like Progressive been Conservative to Charbonneau the
 faithful Guy Conservative the always has been to Charbonneau Like . Party , myself Progressive
It has always been our conviction that the choice of means is the responsibility of the political authorities.  
They did not oppose.  
The Anglican Archbishop, Archbishop Andrew S. Hutchison, said the following at paragraph 2 of his letter dated November 3: 
The amendments proposed to Article 93 by the Quebec government, which would remove the obligation for the Quebec government to have confessional school boards, seems reasonable to us and in keeping with traditional positions enunciated by the Anglican church.  
Honourable senators, the senior representatives of the mainstream Roman Catholic and Protestant groups did not register their opposition to these changes. 
This does not mean that this exercise was one of perfection. 
Indeed, many of us remain unhappy and regret the federal government's position taken with 23(1)( a ) then and now. 
I share, with Senator Pitfield and others, concern in that respect. 
However, unfortunately, I have a memory, and I recall very well that the 1982 Constitution, for which Senator Pitfield was a senior federal advisor, was a minimalist not a maximalist document. 
It was Senator Pitfield and others in power at the time who determined that, in order to pass the 1982 Constitution, the Province of Quebec should be given the option of proclaiming section 23(1)( a ) and that the notwithstanding clause would be incorporated in the 1982 Constitution to eviscerate the charter, both serious sources of our current distress.  
Many of us objected strenuously then, and do now, to giving the Province of Quebec these options. 
However, that is history. 
Many of us objected to the notwithstanding clause pressed by the other provinces, particularly Manitoba. 
Senator Pitfield was there. 
He understood that. 
This I remember.  
However flawed the 1982 Constitution was with regard to these two aspects, the special joint committee shared a defining moment. 
For the first time since 1982, two ministers from the Province of Quebec have appeared before a special joint committee of Parliament in Ottawa and have, in public hearings, given de facto and de jure recognition to the 1982 Constitution. 
Pluralism and the new demographics was the dialectic that we heard emanating from the Bloc members. 
They talked about pluralism - for the very first time. 
 Like myself , Guy has always been faithful to the Progressive Conservative Party .
 , Conservative Party . Guy Charbonneau myself been Progressive to has Like always faithful
 Progressive myself has been to Charbonneau Guy Party Conservative . always faithful , Like
 , Conservative been the has to Like Progressive Party myself faithful . Guy always
Once he makes a decision, he has the merit to carry it through with courage and consistency, sometimes retreating behind a shell impervious to criticism, as I once wrote.  
 shell behind has once consistency with and criticism , , as through Once he I makes he , it sometimes the to retreating merit a carry a courage impervious wrote . decision to
 he a consistency carry and sometimes has decision Once , shell a wrote courage retreating the through , . as to it to , impervious with behind merit makes criticism he I once
 has he wrote Once and decision a courage the merit retreating with once behind shell it a as through , he I to . consistency carry criticism to , impervious makes , sometimes
 courage criticism with , consistency once through carry as Once behind a the and sometimes . shell he wrote , makes impervious to merit he decision , a to has I it retreating
 a consistency behind Once carry wrote through , shell as to makes impervious merit to has . he a once he , and courage criticism decision with it sometimes I retreating , the
 as has consistency criticism to the retreating . makes merit , it sometimes decision shell through behind courage to , wrote once , with I carry Once impervious and he a a he
 Once courage he as through , I . to sometimes a , carry a behind it he criticism and , shell retreating the wrote has with to once impervious consistency merit decision makes
 decision it a wrote , the sometimes Once with behind to once . consistency he a retreating I impervious carry , through criticism shell he , has makes as and to courage merit
 decision the courage retreating once consistency a sometimes he and shell he , behind has , as makes a , to wrote impervious Once through with to it I criticism merit carry .
 it shell the wrote , once to consistency with behind . through and he , as carry decision to merit he a , sometimes has makes courage Once retreating impervious criticism a I
 and he , with through consistency a the impervious a to as has it , sometimes courage I wrote shell , he once criticism decision merit retreating behind carry to makes . Once
 wrote a decision consistency , he courage through I shell to criticism he to . merit the sometimes impervious Once , once has a , behind carry with as it makes retreating and
 Once , he it with once as the consistency to sometimes criticism courage shell through makes he impervious , carry and decision . behind to wrote merit a , retreating a I has
 he to , a , as sometimes and to , it a once behind consistency shell . criticism he I carry the with has decision makes courage Once merit impervious retreating through wrote
 he he to carry behind with through shell and Once merit decision I , a the wrote . criticism , once impervious retreating to has makes sometimes consistency courage , it as a
 shell carry and to he consistency once I it as the courage has he through merit , criticism sometimes behind impervious retreating with , to decision makes a . a Once , wrote
When a major decision comes down from the Supreme Court, the media is there to interview people who wish to comment, mostly negatively, on the decision. 
As I stated, we would not have seen a headline like that 15 years ago.  
That is their function, and Parliament has referred it to them. 
However, the enactment of laws remains the function of Parliament. 
It is not the function of the Supreme Court of Canada or any other court to make laws.  
Honourable senators, I read in today's paper where the families of the Leslie Mahaffy and Kristen French, both of whom were killed by Paul Bernardo, are appealing to the judge to make a law prohibiting evidence of that type being heard by the public in court. 
The interesting point is that they are asking the judge to make the law; they are not asking Parliament. 
Parliament is the highest court in the land and that must always be so. 
It would be most unusual to have a lower court issue a directive to a higher court.  
Honourable senators, I commend Senator Cools for all the work and research she has done. 
Many aspects of her amendment are worthwhile considering. 
However, I feel she has omitted to take into consideration one aspect of our legislation.  
Any law passed by Parliament does not become law until it receives Royal Assent, and having the Supreme Court direct Parliament to pass a law by December 19, 1997 takes away the prerogative of the sovereign. 
That is why we have Royal Assent. 
We could have the ridiculous situation of one of the judges who ordered the enactment of this legislation by December 19 coming into this chamber and giving Royal Assent on behalf of the sovereign.  
Motion in Sub-Amendment 
Hon. Orville H. Phillips :
Therefore, I move: 
That the motion in amendment be amended by deleting the word "and" at the end of paragraph ( b ) and by adding the following after paragraph ( c ): 
( d ) the Court, by its Order of November 19, 1997 that Bill C-16 must be enacted by December 19, 1997, is impeding proceedings in Parliament and is subordinating the Senate of Canada; and 
 Once he makes a decision , he has the merit to carry through with courage and consistency , sometimes retreating behind a shell impervious to criticism , as I once wrote .
 merit carry consistency a with Once he the impervious has to as and courage , he a behind shell to , retreating it makes . once through sometimes wrote , decision criticism
 merit a retreating once and he decision has , sometimes to shell with criticism carry he behind a impervious wrote I makes it courage as Once . , , the to through
 , a , a to has shell once with he as . sometimes criticism carry merit the decision consistency through and wrote Once I makes , to he it retreating behind courage
Senator MacEachen was honoured in this house on June 19, 1996. 
 this Senator 19 June was on , . MacEachen in honoured house 1996
 Senator was 19 , this house MacEachen honoured 1996 in June . on
 MacEachen , was . 19 this on 1996 in June Senator house honoured
 honoured 19 on 1996 Senator this in house , was . June MacEachen
 honoured 1996 MacEachen June . Senator was in house on , this 19
 house 19 in June 1996 Senator . this MacEachen honoured on , was
 , June house MacEachen 19 on this 1996 in . was honoured Senator
 , on was honoured MacEachen June this . in 19 Senator 1996 house
 house , was June Senator on MacEachen this in 19 honoured 1996 .
 house on was Senator , 1996 honoured MacEachen 19 this June . in
 MacEachen , Senator honoured this 1996 was 19 in . house on June
 this MacEachen 19 on June honoured in was . , house 1996 Senator
 on MacEachen , 19 1996 in June house . honoured was Senator this
 in MacEachen this on 19 Senator , . honoured house was 1996 June
 Senator 1996 19 in MacEachen honoured this , house on was . June
 on 19 house MacEachen June . , honoured was this 1996 in Senator
The fact that the notwithstanding clause was used by the Government of Quebec to protect the existing education legislation seems to indicate, however, that the government reacted favourably to the wish expressed by some parents to maintain Protestant and Catholic denominational schools. 
We have every reason to believe that the place of religion in public education will be subject to a full, open and democratic debate and that the parents' choice will continue to prevail, as it has for so long outside Montreal and Quebec City.  
Throughout the debate that took place before the special joint committee and in this House, we considered the fact that subsection 23(1) of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms does not apply to Quebec and the issue of whether the amendment to section 93 would prejudice the educational rights of native Quebecers. 
Section 23 of the Charter and section 93 of the Constitution Act of 1867 concern educational rights and, instinctively, we might think they are closely linked. 
However, they are not constitutionally related and, in any case it seems entirely ill-advised to reduce consent for constitutional change to a mere transaction where one right serves as a bargaining chip for the improvement of another.  
Honourable senators, I strongly urge you to support this resolution. 
Although we noted there was a consensus to amend section 93, we felt the real issue was the quality of the education of children in Quebec, and on that point opinion was unanimous.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Senator Robichaud, allow me to correct an impression that you left and to ask you a question. 
However, I wanted to make this correction, because you referred to the "government in place", when in fact it was the Liberal government of the day that made the decision, over the objections of the Parti Québécois then in opposition.  
I am asking you the same question I asked Senator Grafstein, but to which I did not get an answer. 
Why is it so important to exempt Quebec from section 93 to allow it to reform its school system? 
What is the connection between the two?  
Senator Robichaud :
Let me give you my version of the facts. 
When we heard witnesses from Quebec, including school board officials, parents and teachers, some of them told us that, in its present form, section 93 brings about a superimposition of structures, particularly in the Montreal region. 
These people told us that this was preventing authorities from providing the best possible services. 
These people also told us they wanted the resolution to be passed before the end of the year so they could start long-term planning. 
They would really appreciate having some time to implement these changes.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
 Senator MacEachen was honoured in this house on 19 , 1996 .
 Senator 1996 house 19 . on was in this MacEachen honoured ,
 June . this 19 , 1996 on was honoured house Senator MacEachen
 this , . house was 1996 19 on honoured Senator June in
Prior to his departure after 43 years as a member of Parliament, minister, senator and later Leader of the Opposition in the Senate, Senator MacEachen stated, as recorded at page 747 of the Debates of the Senate : 
 of Leader the the after years the page MacEachen senator : Prior of his a to , Senate recorded of , Opposition at minister stated in and of , , 43 Senate Parliament departure the member later Debates 747 as Senator as
 43 as 747 after , , years the Senate the Senate member Prior senator later minister of the the of Parliament at page in departure Senator of of and Opposition a MacEachen Debates , as to stated : Leader recorded his ,
 of 43 after at his Parliament MacEachen as of , , : Senate recorded later minister Senate years , Prior of of the the senator and stated , to member as departure page Senator a in the Leader 747 Opposition the Debates
 as minister the , page after years Senate : , of Debates recorded Leader 43 in and , Senate MacEachen Prior at stated to , the a departure of member 747 of Opposition senator of Senator his Parliament later the as the
 : the the Senator , Leader minister member in as , of his , of after of the MacEachen to at Senate Senate a Debates of years 43 the , later Parliament and as Prior stated departure 747 page senator recorded Opposition
 the of stated after his recorded to , Senator , Debates Senate 747 MacEachen page years Parliament senator in minister of and of later at member Opposition departure : , a as Leader the Prior of as Senate , the the 43
 page a of of 747 in the , senator Debates of Senate years MacEachen minister as at Leader after departure Opposition member , Prior , 43 , of as Parliament : later Senator Senate recorded stated to and the the the his
 after Prior later the Leader 747 as Senate of the member the page at senator his years of recorded as and : the Parliament Opposition minister a 43 to , Senator , stated MacEachen Senate of Debates departure , of in ,
 his the senator the of member , at , to the of as page years of Senator recorded Debates stated 747 Opposition Senate Parliament of Prior , the MacEachen after , as departure Senate 43 : Leader minister and in later a
 and later Senator Opposition minister Senate the senator recorded Senate after at to the as years Debates his page 747 of , : , MacEachen of , 43 as stated the of Parliament member Leader Prior of departure , in a the
 member and , Senate Opposition , his recorded Leader Senate of at after years to in Prior the as minister of a , departure the later as of 747 senator stated Debates , : MacEachen Senator 43 the page the Parliament of
 page stated , the : 43 Senate of and Senate his Parliament Senator member in the later 747 senator as , departure after , recorded Leader of Prior years MacEachen to of Debates at as minister a Opposition of , the the
 of the of minister , MacEachen 747 43 recorded the the of Parliament , after Leader as years as and at the a Debates Senator to Senate , page of member Senate : Opposition stated departure later in his senator Prior ,
 after of of senator in the 43 Senate Leader departure MacEachen 747 and recorded at as , Opposition to , his , of years : a Prior Debates later as of the Senate stated member Senator the the Parliament page , minister
 Opposition and as of a his , to the minister 747 later the Debates , Senator after recorded Senate at , senator of : member in 43 Leader the , the Senate of as MacEachen departure page stated years Prior of Parliament
 , after the 747 : senator of minister Parliament 43 page , , to the MacEachen departure years Leader Opposition a later as stated Debates of the Senator as his recorded Senate in member at , Senate of Prior and of the
As for RRSPs, they are likely to diminish if employment insurance contributions and taxes are not lowered.  
In my opinion, we will likely see a reduction in private savings, along with an increase in public savings. 
Is it a good thing to increase the role of the state? 
This is what is being done here. 
It implies that if it is in the public domain, the money will be better invested than if individuals invest their savings in the private sector. 
Who can possibly think that it makes sense?  
What happened in the past? 
Can it be said that the government was more cautious than individuals in the management of its funds? 
I am not blaming one government in particular, but the public sector's attitude is often like that. 
I simply note that this is the way things have been done for 40 years.  
Did the government display more shrewdness in the management of business investments? 
Look at the performance of crown corporations. 
Air Canada, CN and Canadair all did well after being privatized. 
In other words, good management started once the government was no longer involved.  
So, we should be cautious before giving the public sector increased responsibilities for the management of funds. 
We must be careful before transferring money from the private to the public sector.  
Let us now look at the impact of the plan on jobs.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Your 15 minutes are up. 
Is leave granted to continue, honourable senators?  
 Prior to his departure after 43 years as a member of Parliament , minister , senator and later Leader of the in the Senate , Senator MacEachen stated , as recorded at page 747 of the Debates of the Senate :
 of years to Parliament Senator : at and Debates the of the departure his , Prior member recorded a page the 43 , minister senator as in stated as of later the Leader of 747 Senate MacEachen , after Senate Opposition
 of departure of in , Prior minister of and at the Leader : Senate , years recorded Senate Opposition as Debates page 747 Parliament a , his to stated as MacEachen senator later of member 43 the Senator the , the
 the of to after as years and member MacEachen of at page Prior departure 747 Opposition Senator 43 his minister Debates Senate of the senator in , , a of the later , Senate recorded the as : , Parliament stated
Still unresolved, however, and perhaps impossible to determine is the issue of the extent to which the Senate can be combative in its own way without encroaching on the House of Commons' prerogatives or responsibility for finance.  
 responsibility the impossible can however without of issue way and for to the in , unresolved own House prerogatives combative is extent to the of its Commons finance , ' Senate . which be perhaps encroaching or on determine the Still
 can to way its own the ' encroaching unresolved and of , the or extent perhaps . , which to combative without determine the of issue is Senate on be prerogatives the in impossible finance responsibility House however for Still Commons
 extent its for and or on Senate Still of . finance which of , prerogatives impossible perhaps to issue , responsibility combative is without unresolved the way be however House encroaching the the ' in to can the determine own Commons
 finance extent its issue is , , unresolved encroaching and combative perhaps the way Commons the Still however impossible without House . or for the in be Senate to of responsibility ' of can on to the which prerogatives determine own
 unresolved extent or to House prerogatives of perhaps determine issue encroaching impossible own for the the Senate the combative can be the its on , ' Commons Still however responsibility without . finance way in to and which , is of
 way encroaching prerogatives to extent for responsibility without unresolved the and impossible finance in own the perhaps of be Commons combative , is the House , the ' to . of Still determine Senate on its issue which or can however
 the extent own combative on impossible or way can to the of is however for , Commons responsibility its issue be in , unresolved House the finance to Still which the prerogatives perhaps ' encroaching . determine of Senate without and
 impossible the combative encroaching finance House of is , to the perhaps issue without of on in unresolved or Senate Commons responsibility be ' its however prerogatives the the extent determine Still can to for , and way . own which
 in ' which of issue impossible to without perhaps to House of Still the unresolved prerogatives encroaching own responsibility the on the and , can extent the is finance combative however or be determine for . , Senate its Commons way
 Senate determine way extent impossible the perhaps the the or own of without combative Commons ' to to unresolved Still House is responsibility however prerogatives the can . be finance of on its in encroaching for issue which , and ,
 impossible on perhaps however the which is can . own prerogatives finance , combative of issue to be the responsibility for Still its ' encroaching unresolved in extent of the Commons without House the determine or to , way Senate and
 unresolved is Senate encroaching or however issue can and way Commons responsibility own to perhaps , ' for , House its without impossible the in determine Still the of which extent combative be . to the prerogatives of on the finance
 to finance , Commons issue however ' Senate be extent on or to combative the without the the and impossible way in . , own the of its which of Still encroaching perhaps House can prerogatives is determine unresolved for responsibility
 responsibility the and is ' encroaching combative own the Commons perhaps way , extent be on can of issue . impossible Still Senate which unresolved however to in determine the without the of or House to , its for prerogatives finance
 without the way . to of is in of House impossible be determine extent its Still prerogatives and , encroaching to ' finance the on for issue combative can , perhaps Commons the which unresolved or the Senate however own responsibility
 the without unresolved combative Senate House own encroaching its for ' which , perhaps determine the of prerogatives . and of responsibility in the Still issue Commons , to way can to or the extent impossible however is finance on be
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
Motion agreed to.  
International Assembly of French-Speaking Parliamentarians 
Meeting held in Luxembourg-Report of Canadian Section Tabled 
Hon. Pierre De Bané :
Honourable senators, pursuant to rule 23(6) of the Senate, I have the honour to present, in both official languages, the reports of the Canadian section of the International Assembly of French-Speaking Parliamentarians as well as the financial report of the 23rd regular session of the IAFSP and its executive committee, held in Luxembourg from July 7 to July 10, 1997.  
Foreign Affairs 
Committee Authorized to Meet During Sitting of the Senate 
Hon. John B. Stewart :
Honourable senators, with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58(1)( a ), I move: 
That the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs have power to sit at 3:15 p.m. tomorrow, Wednesday, December 10, even though the Senate may then be sitting, and that rule 95(4) be suspended in relation thereto.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is leave granted, honourable senators?  
Hon. Noël A. Kinsella (Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition) :
Honourable senators, in the past two years or so, there has been a common understanding in this chamber that Wednesdays would constitute a short day. 
This is why we have been meeting at 1:30 p.m. The general understanding is that we try to finish our business in the chamber by about 3:30 p.m. 
In the past few weeks, we have heard requests like the one raised by the Honourable Senator Stewart. 
If the request speaks to a Tuesday or a Thursday, when we normally meet at 2 p.m. and sit a little longer, there would be no difficulty, all things being equal, in granting leave. 
However, I am having some difficulty in granting leave for a day when we are supposed to be having a short day in any event.  
 Still unresolved , however , and perhaps impossible to determine is the of the extent to which the Senate can be combative in its own way without encroaching on the House of Commons ' prerogatives or responsibility for finance .
 of which determine issue and Still way however responsibility to extent prerogatives of , unresolved is on without , . combative its House be the Senate the the encroaching in finance for the perhaps impossible ' own Commons to or
 on Commons in . own , which the ' way unresolved however the , Senate impossible determine of encroaching for finance and issue the is to can be its extent without of to combative prerogatives or House the Still responsibility
 for issue finance the combative on unresolved encroaching way which its and Commons determine the the Senate or prerogatives , own to Still to the , is can impossible in of of responsibility be ' House extent however without .
Still, this should not keep me from having personal memories and I have quite a few, believe me. 
 from , , have personal quite having . I a Still few keep should not memories and this believe me me
 , having believe , . Still and quite should few not personal I have me keep from a this me memories
 memories me should . not this a personal keep from Still , few and I believe have having quite , me
 personal have believe keep me a . , not having should this , and quite I memories Still from me few
 having me , believe . keep from not personal should and a this quite I have few , Still memories me
 memories quite a not having have me keep , believe and from Still . should personal I me few this ,
 I from me Still me and believe having . memories keep personal not have , this quite should few a ,
 Still , not a having few personal this , quite keep believe from memories me me should have I and .
 me believe , not personal me should and few I keep memories from . Still a having quite this have ,
 a few from believe keep I memories personal have and me me not should quite , . , this Still having
 have Still , from memories I few and me , not personal . me having should keep a this quite believe
 , I having a memories this not keep personal . , have me believe Still few quite and me should from
 this , should have memories personal believe few having . from me me , and keep I a quite not Still
 believe having and few I this . me have keep me , not memories a , should quite personal Still from
 have having this quite from a . should not believe , memories me , personal and me Still few I keep
 , few , not from this a quite memories keep believe . I having and have me me should Still personal
Minister Brassard repeated the well-worn, often-repeated, proposition that no Quebec government will feel bound to recognize the 1982 Constitution. 
Minister Brassard then acknowledged, almost in the same breath, that under the law of the land, under the Supreme Court of Canada, the Province of Quebec was indeed bound by the Constitution Act, 1982. 
This is now clear and unequivocal.  
Clearly and fairly, the Province of Quebec deems itself bound by the 1982 Constitution. 
On the testimony received and based on my personal review, I concluded that the federal government indeed had the power under the 1982 Constitution, section 43, to accede to Quebec's request.  
That Parliament should or would exercise such power was obviously a much more difficult question. 
We recognize, under our Constitution, the nature of the exclusivity of this aspect of education under the Constitution as a provincial matter. 
This question, in pith and substance, is a matter of provincial education within the powers of the Province of Quebec. 
Then, honourable senators, came the more complicated problem alluded to by Senators Wood, Pitfield, Bolduc, Lavoie-Roux and Kirby and Lynch-Staunton, namely, how to determine whether or not, as defenders of the Constitution, we in the Senate could satisfy ourselves that there was a majority of the so-called "minorities" affected by any proposed diminution of their rights or privileges. 
All senators agree that one of our paramount duties in the Senate is to safeguard the Constitution and the rights of the minorities under that Constitution.  
I shall now turn to the essence of section 93, which is called by some commentators, a "Pocket Bill of Rights." 
That is a misnomer.  
In essence, section 93 is a series of privileges rather than full rights. 
Clearly, this is not the case here. 
Section 93 has yet another substantial problem which further diminished and minimized one's ability to define the subsections as containing full rights. 
On its face, these privileges, or limited rights, pertain only to the geography of the city of Montreal and Quebec City at the date of Confederation and beyond, into the province, to the privileges or rights of dissentient Roman Catholic and Protestant denominational school boards.  
Therefore, it is so difficult for me to understand how the subsections of 93 can be considered full rights. 
They could be considered privileges for geographically defined and certain narrowly cast denominational groups.  
Notwithstanding this difficulty, I still considered we had a responsibility to examine whether these groups, said to be affected by these privileges or narrow rights or attenuated rights, agreed with their substitution - not their diminishment or removal - for the architecture of denominational access now afforded under the provisions of Quebec educational laws. 
I say "substitution" because, while the constitutional provisions were being attenuated, denominational rights had previously been incorporated in the Quebec Education Bill 109 and its predecessors leading to that bill. 
 Still , this should keep me from having personal memories and I have quite a few , believe me .
 a should not . I few keep quite me Still memories from this personal and me , have , believe
 having keep personal quite me have few , not from me believe should I , memories Still a this .
 having from this have few , not . a me , quite keep me and Still I memories personal should
For me, Guy Charbonneau is synonymous with a series of vivid, indelible and unforgettable events.  
 indelible For of unforgettable events Guy Charbonneau a and me , series . , synonymous with is vivid
 , and me indelible Charbonneau of a . series For events synonymous Guy unforgettable with , is vivid
 a and Guy is . unforgettable , indelible , series with of events synonymous Charbonneau For me vivid
 with vivid is synonymous unforgettable Guy of a . Charbonneau For and , events series , indelible me
 unforgettable , vivid me events synonymous series Guy with is and , . Charbonneau of indelible a For
 , events For a is and Guy , synonymous me series vivid . unforgettable with Charbonneau indelible of
 Guy , and indelible vivid of . For a series synonymous is Charbonneau unforgettable , with events me
 Guy synonymous , me series a of indelible Charbonneau and vivid , events with For is unforgettable .
 and , is of unforgettable For series Guy Charbonneau indelible a events vivid , . synonymous me with
 indelible Charbonneau vivid synonymous . a series unforgettable , , with For and me events Guy of is
 For a me with indelible . events , synonymous Guy vivid series , unforgettable is Charbonneau and of
 events , synonymous is me . and Guy series Charbonneau a of unforgettable vivid For with indelible ,
 series , of , Charbonneau is with and synonymous Guy vivid a . For unforgettable indelible events me
 with synonymous me Guy vivid and series of , . unforgettable , events a For is Charbonneau indelible
 . with For me indelible is vivid Guy series unforgettable , of , Charbonneau events a and synonymous
 me and a , Guy unforgettable , vivid synonymous For with events series . Charbonneau of indelible is
Senator Gigantès :
Be careful.  
Senator Tkachuk :
Since taking office, they have taken $300 million in new taxes from senior citizens by income-testing the age credit. 
They want Canadians to mature their RRSPs by the year they turn 69 rather than the previous age limit of 71. 
However, seniors do not know about it, and this will be another huge tax grab - Merry Christmas, Canada - by the Liberal Government and Paul Martin. 
Twice they have killed plans to increase the RRSP contribution limits so that people could put money away for their future given that the government will not provide for them.  
The Canadian Association of Retired Persons says that as many as 80,000 Canadians may fail to convert their RRSPs on time. 
Where are the big advertising programs of the Government of Canada which they mount when they really want to advertise something? 
This is a government program they do not want to advertise. 
They want it to slip in, just like this bill, so that people will not know and will not make the proper financial decisions, but instead will be exposed to a huge tax load for the year 1997. 
That is what Paul Martin wants, so that in February he can brag in his budget speech about how he has cleaned up the deficit - on the backs of the unemployed, on the backs of senior citizens, and on the backs of young people who will be paying the $400 million to the new pension plan.  
Senator Gigantès :
That is because over nine years you did nothing to address the deficit.  
Senator Tkachuk :
That is not true.  
The only reason the federal government is dealing with the situation now is that the minister of finance at the time, Michael Wilson, obtained an agreement that created a certain situation. 
There is a word in law for something from which one cannot extricate oneself, and where a decision must be made. 
That is why they have an agreement today. 
We tried to get it done in 1986.  
 For me , Guy Charbonneau is synonymous with a series of vivid , indelible and unforgettable .
 indelible is unforgettable events Guy , with . and For series synonymous me Charbonneau , a of
 series Guy For vivid of , . Charbonneau and , unforgettable events indelible with me synonymous a
 series of For a . synonymous Charbonneau , unforgettable me , indelible Guy with vivid and is
For everything he has done, for all the stormy days and the quiet days, the good times and the bad, the praise and the criticism, I have but two words: thank you!  
 the , the quiet everything but praise For days stormy words all days times the has done criticism , you the thank two and have for ! bad I the and , , : the and good he
 for but and and the , the the all quiet good two the : done days criticism For words have days , the stormy has ! praise I he you bad times thank , and , the everything
 for the days bad all done days ! the praise stormy good the but , , you two , thank and words and the and have : the quiet , For has criticism he I the times everything
 two days times ! the the done have the praise for thank everything has you , the I stormy , the bad but all For , and , and quiet days words he : and criticism good the
 everything thank , ! has , but good quiet days two and the he words I for stormy the times , criticism and you praise For , the all : the the days bad and done have the
 : has For and praise times the two , the he bad ! the quiet have I , , days thank and for words days you but done stormy the everything all and , the the criticism good
 all the , the good , days the criticism has bad , and For ! the you the stormy have , times I : words everything praise two and thank days and for he quiet the but done
 has have the and I you done praise the all criticism quiet : the days he , thank ! stormy For two everything for days bad and and good times the the , the , but words ,
 bad , and the days all the ! but criticism you , : words good the have thank everything praise done , quiet two the For for days I and he stormy times , the the and has
 , you For has everything but he criticism , done thank two the stormy have praise the days quiet all the the good and and times for the ! I the : , bad words days and ,
 days done the but , and , stormy the all the words and ! I for quiet : good the thank you everything criticism bad , , the praise two have he days has For and times the
 stormy days the the days the for bad you words everything praise done I , good , and , the , criticism thank For quiet and : the but and two times he the has have all !
 days the , the and thank , stormy criticism , the done quiet I but words For : two ! praise has bad for , and the you and days the have the times he good everything all
 bad the , the the days he the For the : , everything all times good two criticism has words stormy , and quiet praise but days and you and for done thank , the ! I have
 words days has , and bad praise done you everything , the the the , and two and all have ! for he times days : criticism the good stormy For but , the quiet I the thank
 the stormy : the and everything the ! I thank quiet you times have but has bad all criticism he , , , and For , two for days the days the good done the praise and words
Senator Grafstein :
There are two parts to my honourable friend's question.  
I say, "Yes."  
Once we pass this amendment, it will be for the province of Quebec and those in the Province of Quebec to decide their educational architecture.  
I should like the province of Alberta to do things the way we do them in Ontario. 
Fat chance when it comes to education! 
Honourable senators, I think we have fulfilled our constitutional responsibilities if each senator is individually satisfied that a reasonable test of the majority of the minorities has been achieved. 
Under the evidence presented to us - not outside the room, but before us - that was clear. 
In that respect, I support the report and the resolution.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
It was moved by the Honourable Senator Pépin, seconded by the Honourable Senator Lucier, that this report be adopted.  
Is it your pleasure, honourable senators, to adopt the motion?  
Motion agreed to and report adopted, on division.  
Quebec 
Linguistic School Boards-Motion to Amend Section 93 of Constitution-Debate Adjourned 
Hon. Fernand Robichaud , for Senator Graham, rose pursuant to notice of Thursday, October 2, 1997: 
Whereas the Government of Quebec has indicated that it intends to establish French and English linguistic school boards in Quebec; 
and whereas the National Assembly of Quebec has passed a resolution authorizing an amendment to the Constitution of Canada; 
and whereas the National Assembly of Quebec has reaffirmed the established rights of the English-speaking community of Quebec, specifically the right, in accordance with the law of Quebec, of members of that community to have their children receive their instruction in English language educational facilities that are under the management and control of that community and are financed through public funds; 
and whereas section 23 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms guarantees to citizens throughout Canada rights to minority language instruction and minority language educational facilities under the management and control of linguistic minorities and provided out of public funds; 
 For everything he has done , for all the stormy days and the quiet days , the good times and the bad , the praise and the criticism , I have but two words : you !
 good I you the For two the , everything and and days the for , he the , bad but and thank , criticism days has the times done quiet : praise stormy ! have the words
 and everything has words : the and all for thank praise , ! good have quiet times the days you and stormy the the criticism two the , bad I , days but , he the For
 all : have words , but and , I , good criticism stormy you two done For everything the thank and praise the for times ! the the the days quiet he and has , days bad
Hon. Marcel Prud'homme :
 Hon homme ' Marcel Prud : .
 Hon . : homme Marcel Prud '
 . Prud Hon : ' homme Marcel
 ' Marcel Hon Prud : homme .
 . : Hon Marcel homme Prud '
 : Marcel homme Prud ' Hon .
 . homme Hon : Marcel ' Prud
 . Prud ' homme : Hon Marcel
 : Marcel homme Hon Prud ' .
 . homme Hon Prud ' : Marcel
 Prud homme Hon . ' Marcel :
 Hon . : homme Prud Marcel '
 Hon Marcel homme Prud ' : .
 Prud . homme Hon ' Marcel :
 : Hon ' homme . Prud Marcel
 : ' Prud homme . Hon Marcel
The way ahead for the Quebec educators, parents and students will not be easy. 
Reforms in educational systems, as we have seen in Ontario in recent days, are difficult, fraught with peril and beset with misunderstanding. 
However, I cannot but be impressed with the desire of the Province of Quebec and its citizens to renovate and modernize its school system and move it forward so that the next generation of Canadian citizens, born and educated in the province of Quebec, and others, will be able more fully to participate in our modern Canadian economy.  
To paraphrase Laurier from 100 years ago, the 21st century will indeed belong to Canada.  
Hon. Therese Lavoie-Roux :
I should like to ask Senator Grafstein how he can affirm - perhaps we were not attending the same meeting - that Alliance Québec was in favour of the abolition of section 93?  
They were, as were most people, in favour of linguistic boards, but when it came to the abrogation of section 93, not only were they not in accord with that when they appeared before our committee, they even wrote to us to reconfirm their disagreement with the abrogation of section 93. 
However, Senator Grafstein has said that both the French-speaking Protestants and the English-speaking Catholics were certainly not in agreement, although they were in agreement with linguistic boards.  
It is not only the minority of the majority, in terms of the French-speaking Protestants, but also Alliance Québec that was in disagreement with this.  
I should like to raise many other points but, in view of the time, I will stop there.  
Senator Grafstein :
Honourable senators, I would refer my colleague to the transcript. 
Read the transcript. 
If there is a dispute about evidence, rather than taking my word or that of the honourable senator opposite - with whom I do disagree - senators should read the transcript. 
The transcript will speak for itself.  
Senator Lavoie-Roux :
I think all senators would have wanted to read the transcript, but we did not have enough time.  
The minister appeared before the committee on November 4. I asked him if he felt that minorities would be as well protected by section 23 of the Charter as they were by section 93 of the Constitution, and he said that they would not be as well protected.  
Senator Grafstein :
He and I have a different viewpoint on section 23(1)( a ) of the Charter.  
 Hon . Marcel Prud ' :
 Marcel ' : homme Hon Prud
 ' Prud . homme : Hon
 ' homme : Hon Prud Marcel
Honourable senators, my great friendship with Senator Charbonneau was never a secret. 
 Senator , a with Charbonneau Honourable was senators great . friendship never secret my
 secret Honourable friendship was my Charbonneau senators Senator never with , . great a
 friendship never was secret , great senators Senator with a Charbonneau my . Honourable
 a . great Senator secret Charbonneau my friendship never was Honourable senators with ,
 , with my . a secret friendship Charbonneau Senator Honourable was senators never great
 a senators secret , my with Charbonneau never was friendship great . Senator Honourable
 great never Senator with friendship my was , Honourable secret a Charbonneau . senators
 my secret never Honourable , . a senators friendship with Senator Charbonneau great was
 great a , with was never friendship . Senator senators secret Charbonneau Honourable my
 , Senator my was friendship with senators . a Honourable Charbonneau secret great never
 Senator never senators Charbonneau my friendship secret , with . was great Honourable a
 never with secret Honourable a great was . my Charbonneau , Senator friendship senators
 Honourable , was a with secret . friendship never great senators my Senator Charbonneau
 never friendship with a senators my was secret Charbonneau Senator . great Honourable ,
 great my secret Senator was senators never Charbonneau . friendship with Honourable a ,
 friendship . never , Honourable Charbonneau secret Senator was great senators with my a
Book Launched by Governor General 
Hon. Mabel M. DeWare :
Honourable senators, yesterday, the Right Honourable Romeo LeBlanc, Governor General of Canada, launched an important new book, A History of the Vote in Canada , which recounts how the right to vote has evolved over the past 250 years. 
The book starts at the time of the first elected legislatures in what is now Canada and ends with the most recent federal election. 
It traces changes in voting eligibility, electioneering and voting practices, as well as voter turnout since Confederation. 
Extension of the vote to those who were excluded legally from the franchise, such as women, aboriginal people, religious and racial minorities, is examined in the social context of the period.  
Even though most Canadian adults were eligible to vote by 1920, there is a final chapter that looks at ways to make voting accessible to everyone, including people in all geographic locations and people with physical disabilities.  
A History of the Vote in Canada is meant to be an educational resource and a reminder to Canadians of the significance of the right to vote. 
This is in keeping with Elections Canada's 1993 mandate to educate voters about the democratic right to vote.  
While this book will appeal to historians, political scientists, university and high school teachers and students, it is hoped that it will also reach those who may have difficulty exercising their right to vote.  
As parliamentarians, honourable senators, it is our role to help promote this book and educate our fellow citizens on their rights as voters.  
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
Report of Committee 
Hon. Ron Ghitter , Chair of the Standing Senate Committee on Energy, the Environment and Natural Resources, presented the following report: 
Tuesday, December 9, 1997 
The Standing Senate Committee on Energy, the Environment and Natural Resources has the honour to present its 
SECOND REPORT 
Respectfully submitted, 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this bill be read the third time?  
 Honourable senators , my great friendship with Senator Charbonneau was a secret .
 never Honourable secret with . , Senator friendship great a senators my Charbonneau
 secret senators Senator with a was never . , friendship my Charbonneau great
 senators , Honourable with secret . Charbonneau friendship great Senator a my never
We have known each other for many years and we have discussed politics for a long time.  
 have have a long known each for many other discussed we time . for and politics We years
 many for we a . known have long have other time years discussed each for We politics and
 we many and politics have We time for a have for known each long . discussed years other
 for time have and many each have we a discussed We years for . known other politics long
 known each politics have discussed we years for time a . many have other for long and We
 a years politics We for long time and each other have many we for known have . discussed
 for known and a We we years politics other each . have long many have discussed for time
 years many we . a for have and We long time other politics have each known discussed for
 we have each politics other have years long We and . discussed many for for a known time
 known many years for discussed and long we have each politics other for . a have time We
 each other and for We have a years we . discussed politics for long time known have many
 politics many for We a known long have and we other have for . time discussed years each
 each for a . we known We other and discussed for have time many years have politics long
 for each long and known we discussed have have a politics . for We other many time years
 many have have we known a each discussed We and long other for . for time years politics
 . each time for have known other we a have and years long We for discussed many politics
However, past experience suggests that, notwithstanding the fact that we do meet on Wednesdays at 1:30 p.m., we often sit well beyond three o'clock. 
On one occasion we had witnesses waiting for upwards of an hour.  
Senator Kinsella :
Thank you, Senator Stewart.  
Perhaps I might address the Deputy Leader of the Government, then. 
By way of recapitulation, this issue is important for all honourable senators. 
A request for leave has been made by the Chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee to allow that committee to sit tomorrow, Wednesday, even though the Senate may then be sitting. 
The issue is that Wednesday, in our common understanding, was to be a short day to allow committees to sit on Wednesday afternoons.  
Not just today but at other times, Senator Stewart has brought to our attention the fact that committees operate on that assumption and arrange their business plans, only to be frustrated in executing their business plan by the Senate going way beyond 3:00 or 3:30 p.m. on Wednesday afternoons.  
Senator Stewart has explained to us that that is the main concern. 
He would like some assurance from the leadership on both sides that, on Wednesdays, we would try harder to respect that tradition. 
We on this side agree to make every effort to complete our work on Wednesday afternoons at around 3:00 or 3:15 p.m. If you can also agree, perhaps we do not need to have this motion.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, is leave granted?  
Senator Kinsella :
It depends upon the answer.  
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, we must make an effort to allow committees to sit. 
They do invite witnesses, many of whom come from out of town. 
We inconvenience them if we are not able to hear from them.  
 We have known each other for many years and we have discussed politics for long time .
 and a other time known discussed for many We for politics years have long each have .
 . have have and long politics years for discussed for time each other known many a we
 time have known a we . for have and long discussed other each politics many We for
How many times, around 1979-80, did he try to convince me to join the ranks of the Conservative Party, knowing full well this was an impossible task? 
 ? knowing 1979 of task , to did around 80 me was How well - the , to an times , ranks Party many convince Conservative this impossible join he full try the
 - around he me to many to impossible the well did How an try full 80 ? 1979 , join the convince ranks times was Party knowing Conservative task this , of ,
 times he to this Party , of try was many ? , 1979 - did impossible task , around me to knowing 80 the How full an convince ranks Conservative join the well
 80 was around - 1979 an the join he did times Party this , task try to the ? ranks , knowing convince to Conservative impossible of full well How me many ,
 ranks , many to task 1979 well full Party join Conservative did , of to me How this an the convince knowing try the he 80 - , around impossible times ? was
 1979 to knowing try - the How of ranks Party to around well he , 80 convince task impossible Conservative an ? was the did me , many full times join , this
 80 knowing the 1979 was , did the well an me - Party he How Conservative ranks this impossible full , many around to to , ? times join try of task convince
 to of this , me was he ranks task , times the knowing many 1979 80 full the - , did join impossible convince around an well ? Party try How Conservative to
 Conservative task to the an , How the was he of 1979 did me join knowing , times this to well ? - ranks around , try full many Party convince 80 impossible
 join ? well How , try times Conservative Party ranks task an impossible many full 80 1979 , around he was , to convince to this me - the knowing the did of
 an convince task me this the - , try the Conservative to knowing ranks many of Party was full impossible , well did around ? , 1979 to join How times he 80
 around How join an - times full to task of , was the Party the did Conservative , , try 80 many to this well convince knowing ranks 1979 me ? he impossible
 ? Conservative How full impossible many times , me he , the around to convince - ranks knowing , 1979 80 did was the try task join an well Party to of this
 join me full he task impossible to 80 this Conservative well ? to - did How try knowing convince ranks around Party of 1979 times , many an the , , was the
 many he 80 well ? try me the Party knowing did task , How an around impossible full the to - this to times was join ranks , of 1979 , Conservative convince
 the , of well the to - ranks 80 to times me around join ? , full this Party 1979 he task convince How try was Conservative many did impossible knowing an ,
The liability of $600 billion becomes unfunded if we all quit paying CPP premiums, but the obligations still have to be met. 
That is what Reform was proposing through the election campaign and over the previous four years. 
They have changed. 
Now they want a smaller CPP.  
However, Preston Manning could never explain the first program. 
Now they have a CPP program which they wanted to explain to the minister in committee. 
Well, they could not get it together. 
Preston Manning, who made a promise to do it before committee meetings ended in the other place, failed to do it. 
I can see why.  
They are making false accusations in the House about people. 
It is the typical Reform program we have come to expect. 
They are off in left field somewhere, although I do not think they would want to be described that way.  
Now they want to create a super-RRSP, which does not make any sense because, not only is it at odds with what they said in committee and what they said in the election campaign, it does not fit into their tax plan. 
Remember, they have a tax plan with a flat tax. 
With the flat tax, you reduce the amount of exemptions. 
We are not getting any ideas from them.  
Now I will turn to the Liberals.  
Senator Gigantès :
Be careful.  
Senator Tkachuk :
 How many times , around 1979 - 80 , did he try convince me to join the ranks of the Conservative Party , knowing full well this was an impossible task ?
 this was the ? around he , - convince to an of , times ranks well full Conservative impossible many , me knowing task 80 the did How join try Party 1979
 1979 to me - 80 times Party did this How task many the of full ranks an knowing the Conservative convince he , was to , impossible join around well , ?
 the knowing convince many Party the , , was times 80 ? did try task full he to of How ranks 1979 this join around an well impossible - to Conservative me
I will not forget all these memories. 
 forget not will memories I all . these
 not these memories will all forget I .
 I memories not all forget these will .
 all forget I memories not will these .
 will . forget these not I memories all
 forget memories all not will . I these
 memories forget I not these will all .
 these memories not will . I forget all
 these will . forget I all memories not
 not I forget . these all memories will
 will . memories forget these not I all
 all forget not will . these memories I
 . I these will not memories forget all
 all not . forget these will memories I
 these will memories all I not . forget
 these forget memories not . I will all
At times, it appears the Supreme Court of Canada considers that the Constitution consists only of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 
Despite all the evidence - the stolen truck, the blood on the accused - the judges were only interested in one thing, and that was the arrest warrant. 
There was no warrant because the police acted on the spot when they had the accused, and I think they acted quite properly.  
Honourable senators, the Supreme Court ignored the rights of Mr. Boyle. 
Section 7 of the Charter indicates that Mr. Boyle had the right to life, privacy and security of the person, and those rights were not to be taken from him except by and in accordance with the principles of fundamental justice.  
I think the justices of the Supreme Court of Canada should be sent a message reminding them that the victim also had rights under the Charter.  
In all fairness, honourable senators, I must say that three of the justices dissented with the majority decision. 
They felt the police action had no bearing or outcome on the decision. 
The chief justice came down the middle and quoted the decision made by former chief justice Brian Dickson, which I understand finds that, if the subject is not spelled out in the Constitution, it is implied as being there. 
However, there again, that is merely my interpretation.  
I emphasize again that Mr. Boyle had the right to his life. 
He had the right to have a vehicle and operate it, and he had the right to have money in his possession. 
All those were taken away from him, and all the Supreme Court of Canada could think of was that piece of paper called a "warrant" and to criticize the police for not having such a document.  
I wanted to suggest that perhaps criminals should apply for a warrant before they commit murder, but I do not want to pursue that because I am afraid that some Charter judge will give them a warrant or a licence to do so. 
Fifteen years ago, I would have been shocked at criticism of a decision rendered by the Supreme Court; but, today that is commonplace. 
When a major decision comes down from the Supreme Court, the media is there to interview people who wish to comment, mostly negatively, on the decision. 
As I stated, we would not have seen a headline like that 15 years ago.  
That is their function, and Parliament has referred it to them. 
However, the enactment of laws remains the function of Parliament. 
It is not the function of the Supreme Court of Canada or any other court to make laws.  
 I will not forget all these .
 forget will . not these memories all
 memories not all forget will I these
 these I . memories forget not all
I listened to my good friend Senator Grimard and to the other honourable senators who paid tribute to Senator Charbonneau, and I support their comments about his great knowledge of economic, trade and international issues.  
 their Senator I Grimard the about of international issues and , Senator support other his I to friend economic honourable paid to my good comments senators and great listened , Charbonneau tribute trade who . knowledge to and
 their issues comments of Charbonneau to to who my , I friend listened senators honourable to economic about support Grimard . tribute international and I Senator good paid Senator , the and other trade his and great knowledge
 their senators other , honourable issues international great paid comments Grimard and to knowledge to my Senator the trade I support his and friend about Charbonneau tribute listened who and to good I of . , economic Senator
 I senators Grimard , international other friend to support to knowledge and tribute good Charbonneau Senator great their to honourable his , trade who about . issues economic Senator the and I paid comments of and listened my
 and trade listened of economic knowledge great about , tribute and friend I good honourable . my his Grimard who comments other support , Senator to I and to their paid issues senators Senator to the international Charbonneau
 Charbonneau my senators to Senator of Senator great their comments his and the I trade , tribute listened , support . to to I Grimard paid other about and issues economic knowledge friend who good honourable and international
 to to support the knowledge , paid Senator Grimard tribute honourable other and trade his international who good and of , my I and their issues senators friend Senator about to great economic . I Charbonneau listened comments
 tribute I paid Senator their support trade Charbonneau great issues economic senators who to the good knowledge to international I his Grimard listened Senator and about comments and honourable other of friend to , , and . my
 paid and great to trade comments honourable issues knowledge support good listened my who Senator senators I and international about I , of to . their Senator to tribute Grimard economic his friend the , and other Charbonneau
 about his good I , friend issues the tribute . , I great comments to and paid to Senator their and honourable other and Charbonneau Grimard my listened of who trade support senators economic knowledge to Senator international
 trade Senator to to my support knowledge economic who the and issues of comments I I honourable and international senators paid good tribute great to Grimard . Senator other Charbonneau and friend about listened , their his ,
 trade good Senator support about Grimard friend other Senator to paid to and listened my . great senators their the of to and international , Charbonneau economic I and knowledge tribute his honourable who issues I , comments
 their his Senator issues great knowledge other and who I I to listened paid my Grimard friend support good to and tribute honourable to economic senators trade of Charbonneau about , the international Senator comments and , .
 international and to , tribute honourable support friend listened the who issues senators I their I Grimard Senator Senator to his about comments my , trade great economic . knowledge and Charbonneau good other of and paid to
 trade support of to Charbonneau paid senators knowledge listened Grimard international and Senator and to their I . friend I tribute my , honourable about his economic Senator , the good who great issues to comments other and
 knowledge international issues senators . economic the to , friend Senator tribute trade good their to about comments and and Senator his , Charbonneau paid to of who listened I other Grimard support and honourable great my I
Therefore, it is so difficult for me to understand how the subsections of 93 can be considered full rights. 
They could be considered privileges for geographically defined and certain narrowly cast denominational groups.  
Notwithstanding this difficulty, I still considered we had a responsibility to examine whether these groups, said to be affected by these privileges or narrow rights or attenuated rights, agreed with their substitution - not their diminishment or removal - for the architecture of denominational access now afforded under the provisions of Quebec educational laws. 
I say "substitution" because, while the constitutional provisions were being attenuated, denominational rights had previously been incorporated in the Quebec Education Bill 109 and its predecessors leading to that bill. 
There is a clear, overwhelming consensus for citizens in the province of Quebec to maintain a form, some form, of denominational teaching within their school system architecture.  
It is equally clear that there was an overwhelming consensus with few dissents throughout every segment of Quebec for renovating the Quebec school system into two linguistic streams, two linguistic boards, English and French. 
There is no question whatsoever in my mind, based on the evidence that I heard.  
Now we come to the more difficult question confronting members of the committee - to determine if there was a "majority" of the so-called "minorities" affected or given these denominational privileges.  
Even here, we had difficulty in definition. 
Notwithstanding that, we still treated that majority as if it were a minority.  
I will not repeat Senator Stewart's questions yesterday about section 93 and its limited scope, but I commend all students of the Constitution to examine section 93 and see how even the subsections of section 93, in so far as that section pertains to the province of Quebec, are much narrower in its scope than is clearly understood or debated in this Senate chamber. 
I will not go into that aspect of this debate. 
It would take half an hour, but I would be pleased to do so privately with any senator who is interested.  
The evidence we heard was extensive, definitive and clear. 
Let me quickly review the committee's evidence that brought it to conclude that there was a strong majority of the so-called minorities affected.  
We had a unanimous resolution in the National Assembly of Quebec, both parties, with two abstentions. 
The efforts made by the Quebec ministers seem to assure that a strong consensus had been obtained.  
We heard direct evidence from 68 groups composed of over 100 individual witnesses. 
Notwithstanding the short time-frames allotted in our terms of reference and as referenced by Senator Lynch-Staunton, the committee clearly heard every viewpoint that people wished to express.  
I hear Senator Wood. 
 I listened to my good friend Senator Grimard and to the other honourable senators who paid tribute to Senator Charbonneau , and I support their about his great knowledge of economic , trade and international issues .
 , the listened friend to Grimard trade and support international tribute about . to Charbonneau honourable my Senator issues senators and to comments Senator his and economic , other who I knowledge of good great I paid
 issues and their . of economic to , my and who the paid I and tribute friend to other international good to great I trade Grimard senators his Charbonneau , Senator support Senator knowledge comments about honourable
 tribute their friend other great and and international who paid senators knowledge to and comments Senator Charbonneau issues economic , I trade I good . to my his , to listened honourable support Grimard the Senator about
Senator Charbonneau was always surprised at how little interest I had in such important matters. 
 surprised such . Senator little in Charbonneau important always I matters interest at had was how
 always had was . important I at surprised Senator Charbonneau such little interest in matters how
 was always had at interest I little . important Senator surprised Charbonneau how such matters in
 surprised . important was always Senator little at Charbonneau in such matters I had interest how
 how Senator matters such important surprised at in was had . little interest I always Charbonneau
 was surprised little important Charbonneau how interest in had I always Senator matters at such .
 matters such how interest in important Senator Charbonneau always had little I surprised was . at
 little matters at was Senator such important had I interest always surprised how in . Charbonneau
 matters at I surprised always in Senator had interest was such how Charbonneau . little important
 little how important I surprised Senator had was interest matters always such in . Charbonneau at
 Senator I interest had little surprised in Charbonneau important such . how was at always matters
 little had important surprised matters . I always such Charbonneau how was at Senator in interest
 in how surprised little Charbonneau was I had at important interest always such . Senator matters
 in was how at I such interest little Senator . Charbonneau matters important surprised always had
 surprised little always Charbonneau matters important at such interest had I was . how Senator in
 was in at little surprised interest I always Charbonneau matters important . had such Senator how
I concluded, honourable senators, that the overwhelming evidence was that the majority of the minorities affected by these rights and privilege were in favour of the amendments.  
The Roman Catholic Archbishops of Quebec and the Anglican Archbishop have letters on record in which they clearly indicate they did not oppose the amendment.  
I want to read those letters into the record because they are important.  
A different situation exists in Quebec. 
Nevertheless, our assembly did not oppose the choice to amend section 93. 
It has always been our conviction that the choice of means is the responsibility of the political authorities.  
They did not oppose.  
The Anglican Archbishop, Archbishop Andrew S. Hutchison, said the following at paragraph 2 of his letter dated November 3: 
The amendments proposed to Article 93 by the Quebec government, which would remove the obligation for the Quebec government to have confessional school boards, seems reasonable to us and in keeping with traditional positions enunciated by the Anglican church.  
Honourable senators, the senior representatives of the mainstream Roman Catholic and Protestant groups did not register their opposition to these changes. 
This does not mean that this exercise was one of perfection. 
Indeed, many of us remain unhappy and regret the federal government's position taken with 23(1)( a ) then and now. 
I share, with Senator Pitfield and others, concern in that respect. 
However, unfortunately, I have a memory, and I recall very well that the 1982 Constitution, for which Senator Pitfield was a senior federal advisor, was a minimalist not a maximalist document. 
It was Senator Pitfield and others in power at the time who determined that, in order to pass the 1982 Constitution, the Province of Quebec should be given the option of proclaiming section 23(1)( a ) and that the notwithstanding clause would be incorporated in the 1982 Constitution to eviscerate the charter, both serious sources of our current distress.  
Many of us objected strenuously then, and do now, to giving the Province of Quebec these options. 
However, that is history. 
Many of us objected to the notwithstanding clause pressed by the other provinces, particularly Manitoba. 
Senator Pitfield was there. 
He understood that. 
 Senator Charbonneau was always surprised at how little I had in such important matters .
 Charbonneau little such important was Senator had surprised at matters . always in how I
 little had was I matters Senator surprised Charbonneau always interest at how in . important
 interest such had was surprised in at I how Charbonneau matters . Senator always important
Still, I always wanted to learn, and if I could have chosen my mentor, he would have been my first choice.  
 , , could have always I . and mentor my have first wanted Still my if to I learn choice , would been he chosen
 my learn my to have , and been . he I , have would always choice chosen wanted I first if could , Still mentor
 my have chosen could to , Still my and have first been . learn choice , mentor wanted always I he would I , if
 learn chosen if I , and have . could wanted have would he , to , choice mentor my my been first always I Still
 mentor to Still I he if my chosen choice have always would been , , I , could have first my and wanted . learn
 to my , and I would always could mentor I . my , choice if he have been wanted learn first have chosen Still ,
 , wanted he could , my choice been , I first always learn mentor if would to my and I have Still chosen . have
 my wanted would my , and have he first could I always . choice to been Still if chosen , have mentor , I learn
 always have , to Still mentor , choice first would I I . wanted been my chosen he learn if could my , and have
 to choice if . my , I been , would my could he learn have and first have always Still mentor wanted I , chosen
 , I , my he and first chosen have if wanted Still choice to my always . have would could learn been mentor , I
 my choice mentor , wanted Still been first and . if I my always learn he to , would could have I have chosen ,
 could been chosen I , mentor wanted my . I to first always , he learn choice if have would and have my , Still
 chosen to , learn wanted mentor , choice I , would have he my my I . always if could and have Still been first
 to my first chosen , if Still I he my mentor , always . and would , have wanted could have learn been choice I
 Still choice he learn . to wanted if mentor been , my chosen I have and , I would first my have always , could
Hon. Mabel M. DeWare :
Honourable senators, my figures show that, four years ago, the provinces received more than $19 billion in cash transfers for health, education and welfare through what was then known as the Canadian Assistance Program and Established Programs Financing. 
The government's math provides some good news, as the original plan was to give them even less.  
The problem is that some provinces will get less under the new scheme while others will get more. 
Indeed, seven of the ten provinces will actually see their cash transfers fall even further, including all of Atlantic Canada.  
The cash transfer to Nova Scotia will fall from $427 million to $411 million, which is a difference of $16 million. 
The transfer for Prince Edward Island will fall from $60 million to $59 million, which is a reduction of $1 million. 
The cash transfer to Newfoundland will fall from $281 million to $251 million, which is a difference of $30 million. 
New Brunswick will lose $11 million. 
The total loss to the Atlantic provinces is $58 million.  
At the same time, three provinces, Ontario, Alberta and British Columbia will see their cash payments actually rise. 
Atlantic Canada's loss is their gain.  
Can the Leader of the Government tell us if his government believes that it is fair to ask the provinces that can least afford it to continue to receive less money year after year by way of support for health, education and social assistance?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
I thank the honourable Senator DeWare for doing the mathematics for me. 
I only wish I had done it myself prior to coming into the Senate today. 
I would be happy to investigate the reasons why those particular numbers appear in the manner in which she has presented them.  
Senator DeWare :
I appreciate that. 
It will not matter that we are less able to raise money than the so-called "have provinces."  
 Still I always wanted to learn , and if I could have chosen my mentor , he would have been my first choice .
 my been to he have could I and mentor learn if would first choice my , wanted have , chosen . always , Still
 . chosen if could first Still and have learn my always my , to I mentor would wanted been , he choice , I
 could , and wanted mentor my I would chosen , choice been first have if I . have Still always he , learn to
Honourable Senator Charbonneau, I wish you a happy retirement and excellent health.  
 excellent wish Senator Charbonneau retirement health a and Honourable . happy you I ,
 health Charbonneau wish Honourable excellent retirement a happy you I Senator . , and
 retirement happy health , excellent a wish Charbonneau and Senator Honourable I you .
 Honourable . Senator happy health retirement a wish I excellent you Charbonneau and ,
 Honourable excellent retirement wish Charbonneau . Senator I a health happy and , you
 you retirement Senator a . health I excellent , happy and Honourable Charbonneau wish
 wish a , . Senator happy you Honourable and retirement I excellent health Charbonneau
 you , a I Honourable and excellent retirement Charbonneau health Senator . happy wish
 Charbonneau health retirement I Honourable and . you happy a wish excellent , Senator
 Charbonneau a happy you Honourable Senator , . wish and health excellent I retirement
 Honourable a retirement wish Charbonneau . health you happy , I excellent Senator and
 and happy excellent health wish you a retirement Honourable . , Charbonneau Senator I
 and happy Charbonneau excellent Honourable a you . , Senator health retirement wish I
 . and happy Charbonneau Senator you Honourable , health retirement I excellent a wish
 . I health Senator , a Charbonneau wish happy Honourable excellent you retirement and
 I , Senator and you Charbonneau happy retirement a health Honourable wish . excellent
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, the answer is yes, there are 30 helicopters in the inventory. 
As I indicated yesterday, 24 were cleared, and six remain to be inspected. 
They will be inspected by December 18.  
Of the 24 that were inspected, only two were found to be in need of repair. 
As to precisely where the other six are located, I would need to consult with the appropriate authorities at National Defence. 
I will bring forward an answer for my honourable friend.  
Senator Forrestall :
Was there any criticism from our NATO allies with respect to the grounding of these aircraft? 
My understanding is that these aircraft are at sea, and a number of them are engaged in some training exercises. 
Were we criticized for not being able to live up to our obligations?  
Senator Graham :
Not to my knowledge. 
It is my understanding that those helicopters are at sea on exercises. 
As to precisely where they are, on whatever ocean, I cannot positively say. 
It might be a military secret, as a matter of fact.  
Federal-Provincial Relations 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Atlantic Provinces Equal to Increase in Social Transfers-Government Position 
Hon. Brenda M. Robertson :
Honourable senators, I have a supplementary that goes back to questions raised by the Honourable Senator DeWare. 
 Honourable Senator Charbonneau , wish you a happy retirement and excellent health .
 health Charbonneau a happy you Honourable retirement wish and Senator , excellent I
 retirement you wish and a Senator I , happy Honourable excellent Charbonneau health
 excellent , health Honourable Charbonneau . a I Senator you retirement wish happy
Hon. Richard J. Doyle :
 . Hon : . Richard Doyle J
 Doyle Richard . . J : Hon
 Doyle J : . Richard Hon .
 Hon Doyle . J : . Richard
 . . Hon : J Richard Doyle
 Richard Doyle . : Hon J .
 Hon . Richard : Doyle . J
 Doyle : Hon J . Richard .
 Doyle : . . Richard J Hon
 : J Richard . Doyle Hon .
 . . J Hon Doyle Richard :
 . J Doyle : . Hon Richard
 J : . Hon . Doyle Richard
 : Doyle Richard . . Hon J
 : . . Doyle Hon Richard J
 Richard : . Hon J Doyle .
It is the typical Reform program we have come to expect. 
They are off in left field somewhere, although I do not think they would want to be described that way.  
Now they want to create a super-RRSP, which does not make any sense because, not only is it at odds with what they said in committee and what they said in the election campaign, it does not fit into their tax plan. 
Remember, they have a tax plan with a flat tax. 
With the flat tax, you reduce the amount of exemptions. 
We are not getting any ideas from them.  
Now I will turn to the Liberals.  
Senator Gigantès :
Be careful.  
Senator Tkachuk :
Since taking office, they have taken $300 million in new taxes from senior citizens by income-testing the age credit. 
They want Canadians to mature their RRSPs by the year they turn 69 rather than the previous age limit of 71. 
However, seniors do not know about it, and this will be another huge tax grab - Merry Christmas, Canada - by the Liberal Government and Paul Martin. 
Twice they have killed plans to increase the RRSP contribution limits so that people could put money away for their future given that the government will not provide for them.  
The Canadian Association of Retired Persons says that as many as 80,000 Canadians may fail to convert their RRSPs on time. 
Where are the big advertising programs of the Government of Canada which they mount when they really want to advertise something? 
This is a government program they do not want to advertise. 
They want it to slip in, just like this bill, so that people will not know and will not make the proper financial decisions, but instead will be exposed to a huge tax load for the year 1997. 
That is what Paul Martin wants, so that in February he can brag in his budget speech about how he has cleaned up the deficit - on the backs of the unemployed, on the backs of senior citizens, and on the backs of young people who will be paying the $400 million to the new pension plan.  
Senator Gigantès :
 Hon . Richard J . Doyle
 Richard . J Hon . Doyle
 Richard : Doyle . J .
 . : Hon . Richard J
Honourable senators, sometimes we must wait for untimely but divine intervention or the celebration of a seventy-fifth birthday to hear much said about the special skills and good works of colleagues who share time with us in the Senate.  
 said untimely of of senators time divine special and for Honourable - a but skills good in we hear the . with share celebration the seventy intervention sometimes the fifth about much or Senate who us to works birthday colleagues must wait ,
 or intervention in must but the share of much time celebration wait we for and the colleagues hear special about of . divine the untimely Honourable works with birthday good Senate - who , to sometimes skills us seventy fifth senators a said
 divine we the fifth time intervention skills untimely the us of but with senators - birthday to , good special works colleagues must for wait seventy a hear celebration much in about of said the Senate . sometimes and or Honourable share who
 the for said wait skills us time of a seventy we Senate much must good special share colleagues birthday . with of celebration works - the , Honourable untimely in to fifth but senators or hear and who the divine intervention about sometimes
 divine colleagues or hear wait and . senators to must fifth - good for the , the the sometimes Honourable celebration skills with said but works untimely seventy much time in who about of a we special us share of Senate birthday intervention
 hear much , Honourable good but us seventy special sometimes divine intervention for who and of untimely about the we share colleagues - to in must senators works of . said the birthday wait celebration time skills fifth Senate with the or a
 intervention - us the but untimely skills celebration fifth special said share who we hear and wait a colleagues of about . in works Honourable must Senate , for sometimes much good time senators divine the birthday of the with or seventy to
 works we who but the fifth seventy in us special and to good . senators share - with , the birthday of much Senate a wait about divine celebration colleagues untimely sometimes skills the time intervention said Honourable or for of must hear
 seventy Honourable untimely us share for the much celebration birthday wait with hear about works good a must intervention , but the senators the sometimes of time who to skills special fifth . Senate in - we or colleagues of and divine said
 we sometimes the fifth intervention the of must celebration share the Senate but time untimely for - in with a Honourable said us wait . hear much divine or of to colleagues about seventy , good works birthday and who senators special skills
 about hear divine of colleagues wait good with in a skills the . must the fifth of works said who to untimely and much birthday senators share Honourable for celebration but us we , special the sometimes intervention or time Senate seventy -
 fifth who about of divine skills but to in or intervention must a with colleagues we much , the . Honourable untimely the and - wait the works said time sometimes senators celebration hear good special seventy for us Senate birthday of share
 works hear of wait Senate or who the special - colleagues in fifth celebration but time the the must us with much of seventy birthday . sometimes Honourable for , good untimely to skills said share intervention a senators about we divine and
 or intervention , us must and works sometimes with of said Honourable colleagues wait share the the . fifth time we Senate but senators much a divine about birthday to celebration good untimely in - hear who special for seventy the of skills
 us special for untimely divine we works fifth colleagues , skills much a - who the the with and said share celebration the of time Senate seventy or about Honourable intervention in . birthday good of hear sometimes to wait but senators must
 wait good hear or birthday us - celebration about a for skills senators much time works sometimes Senate , we untimely seventy but share of in the special said intervention Honourable of who to the fifth with divine must colleagues the . and
Those who believe that "big brother" will be kinder than the community of specialists in the private sector are seriously wrong.  
Even for the private sector specializing in this type of operations, whether mutual funds, national brokerages, or trusts, when the volume exceeds $50 or $60 million, the performance ratio is not proportional to the volume of the funds being managed.  
Private enterprise is aware of that. 
It seems only the government is not.  
The huge monopoly to be created presents a very high risk of inefficiency, of bad investments, and therefore of poor performance. 
Why should everyone be obliged to contribute, to provide funds to a manager who may do a worse job than the person who actually owns those funds?  
If some are deemed to have not done a good job, they are replaced, something is done about it.  
We are familiar with the virtues of competition in the private sector, which results in a raised level of performance. 
That is good for the consumer, so why would it not be applicable to this particular type of services?  
Analysis of investments, or the decision as to the choice of investment for a business, is a highly technical undertaking, but also a risky one. 
This is why, in all wisdom, we must not "put all our eggs in one basket," as the old saying goes. 
Ought we not to have a number of baskets instead, so that any one bad decision will not be a huge disaster?  
This diversification of investments is wise; ought it not to be institutionalized in the law, and ought not the number of independent responsibility centres for investments to be increased?  
My third point concerns the relationship between the government, the Minister of Finance in particular, and the agency in question. 
It will always be tempting to use these funds to finance governments, at lower rates than if it had been invested in the open market. 
That is, in fact, what has been done since 1996 under the present system. 
It must be ensured that a conflict of interest of this kind is not permitted at all. 
I will return to this shortly.  
My fourth point concerns investment policy. 
The law should provide that the administrators of the fund are responsible for ensuring contributors a reasonable pension, while providing them with the best return, that is, the safest and best return possible.  
 Honourable senators , sometimes we must wait for untimely but divine intervention or the celebration of a seventy - fifth birthday to hear much said about the special skills and good works colleagues who share time with us in the Senate .
 the sometimes the time skills Honourable good wait for and of works intervention but Senate birthday - of must special about untimely colleagues to we a fifth or , hear divine us . in who share senators the seventy with much celebration
 fifth in colleagues to seventy with said celebration share sometimes or divine the of Honourable senators time about works hear . much the and untimely a good but intervention of wait we for special skills birthday - must the Senate us ,
 but divine skills about Senate we wait Honourable - for the untimely and works fifth intervention of the hear or of us sometimes birthday to time must celebration share senators much good the who said , a special . colleagues in with
I am especially glad today to hear from Senators Prud'homme and Grimard and Senators John Lynch-Staunton and Al Graham, a beginning of the cataloguing of the good works of Guy Charbonneau, a wise senator whose accomplishments have for too long a time been buried by those in frantic need of a scapegoat for the wars in this house.  
 in Lynch a I a frantic been John the accomplishments long scapegoat of works of Al , have those Charbonneau Staunton whose to the need time for Senators especially wars a and a Grimard beginning of this today homme Graham of hear Prud in ' Guy - and wise for senator am and cataloguing by Senators house . from , glad good buried too the
 Prud been those for a of a in buried in wars Staunton scapegoat John today homme frantic Charbonneau whose house good beginning cataloguing too the especially ' accomplishments , . a of works Lynch by Senators glad , Senators from hear to Guy Grimard a Al of of - the time have this and senator need I and Graham wise the long and for am
 I glad scapegoat a Lynch good need and Prud whose too the hear of been of cataloguing from those senator Senators this , and a Charbonneau . especially wars accomplishments buried Al and , ' - time am John by for the homme Guy today in Graham works house beginning the of Grimard frantic long a to Staunton of have a Senators wise for in
 the ' wars house John wise long a Guy in of Senators , been Senators buried a a Lynch from the scapegoat cataloguing hear senator Prud Al for Graham especially in of those this of good of works by homme today and - Staunton and , the have accomplishments beginning . am and need to I time frantic whose for glad too Grimard Charbonneau a
 to the and cataloguing whose wise this the of works senator Senators in beginning Charbonneau for Graham wars frantic a in house Grimard good , Senators hear accomplishments the Prud by of Al Staunton and buried of especially for am - long John from glad a homme and I need scapegoat today ' been a , those . have a too Lynch of time Guy
 of Grimard for the Charbonneau and time for and homme Prud cataloguing in am long accomplishments from to wars Senators John ' Guy in the house too Lynch need of Senators Graham the hear . have whose a Staunton of a a and this buried a of beginning , scapegoat works especially frantic good by senator been today wise , glad those I Al -
 Guy too have buried today works of the Lynch of frantic in whose the long the , wise Senators Senators hear - ' for this cataloguing for and a . Al scapegoat to a glad especially by house I am and a John of senator in time , wars homme Prud Staunton good been accomplishments beginning Graham from of a those Grimard Charbonneau need and
 the Al Guy senator for buried too Charbonneau of especially wise and whose to time works in in Senators ' for cataloguing and hear , of this . today am have wars Graham scapegoat Lynch the Senators a John a house and Prud Staunton frantic accomplishments been good need homme , - of of from by those long Grimard beginning a glad I the a
 , Senators too senator in need this Charbonneau a am a a buried and for of a the hear and by those of from . Senators of to homme works , wars time today - wise Grimard good John Graham especially Staunton long accomplishments the glad house been have of and I scapegoat Guy frantic Al ' Prud Lynch whose beginning the for in cataloguing
 , hear house beginning Al of been I . good a senator works Prud scapegoat am for a a from in have Grimard the today Charbonneau accomplishments and ' this for frantic wise wars John especially those whose the Graham in need the Senators to of Guy glad buried Lynch of , Staunton a by long too and of homme Senators cataloguing - and time
 Lynch a too Senators Senators Graham homme Staunton . I , hear frantic for beginning whose in of for scapegoat today long in and wars need time the of and am works senator from the have a Grimard those ' of Al house buried to a been John glad especially the of by - Prud wise Guy and Charbonneau good cataloguing , this a accomplishments
 am those wise hear for Lynch a , today Grimard Staunton Graham from and of long of the especially for in homme a house - whose a Charbonneau Guy scapegoat this glad , by been good in Senators to the Senators Al accomplishments the have too works of John buried need cataloguing I wars . beginning time frantic Prud senator ' and of and a
 Prud good , need this accomplishments Al Graham Staunton a of cataloguing Senators and buried and . a I been for glad Charbonneau the works for a of long beginning today from the whose in hear frantic Guy of have Senators John of wars especially too senator homme house and by Grimard those - am a scapegoat Lynch in the ' , wise time to
 and frantic the Al a of I senator , this Senators those house scapegoat of been good long and of , too beginning whose need for wars . a by especially John a Grimard glad wise works hear accomplishments Guy for buried today have from Charbonneau Graham and a Senators in homme to the of cataloguing Lynch - the ' Staunton in Prud time am
 beginning need in works the and Al - house Senators good senator cataloguing a long I today in am a time whose and for scapegoat hear glad , too been of homme Graham by especially this , the the and for from ' . to John accomplishments buried Prud have a wars of Charbonneau a wise of Grimard Lynch Senators of Guy frantic those Staunton
 buried need been Guy a and works scapegoat . accomplishments , for the from this those in time in by and ' Prud good to - cataloguing the homme Al , frantic of Lynch am Staunton whose especially today Graham wise John the of glad a too house I a a of Grimard Charbonneau Senators for Senators wars of long have and beginning senator hear
Hon. Ron Ghitter , Chair of the Standing Senate Committee on Energy, the Environment and Natural Resources, presented the following report: 
Tuesday, December 9, 1997 
The Standing Senate Committee on Energy, the Environment and Natural Resources has the honour to present its 
SECOND REPORT 
Respectfully submitted, 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this bill be read the third time?  
On motion of Senator Butts, bill placed on the Orders of the Day for third reading at the next sitting of the Senate.  
Income Tax Conventions Implementation Act, 1997 
Report of Committee 
Hon. Michael Kirby , Chairman of the Standing Senate Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce, presented the following report: 
Tuesday, December 9, 1997 
The Standing Senate Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce has the honour to present its 
SIXTH REPORT 
Your Committee, to which was referred the Bill C-10, Act to implement a convention between Canada and Sweden, a convention between Canada and the Republic of Kazakhstan, a convention between Canada and the Republic of Iceland and a convention between Canada and the Kingdom of Denmark for the avoidance of double taxation and the prevention of fiscal evasion with respect to taxes on income and to amend the Canada-Netherlands Income Tax Convention Act, 1986 and the Canada-United States Tax Convention Act, 1984, has examined the said Bill in obedience to its Order of Reference dated December 8, 1997, and now reports the same without amendment.  
Respectfully submitted, 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this bill be read the third time?  
On motion of Senator Kirby, bill placed on the Orders of the Day for third reading at the next sitting of the Senate.  
Present State and Future of Agriculture 
 I am especially glad today to from Senators Prud ' homme and Grimard and Senators John Lynch - Staunton and Al Graham , a beginning of the cataloguing of the good works of Guy Charbonneau , a wise senator whose accomplishments have for too long a time been buried by those in frantic need of a scapegoat for the wars in this house .
 - by those in John this Lynch senator Prud cataloguing and , house the buried Guy especially the works , Grimard wise whose am accomplishments of Senators I Charbonneau of wars have to homme good for a of scapegoat Al in glad the beginning ' too and long Staunton of a frantic for and Senators today need hear from been a . a Graham
 am good house whose , of the homme in I . scapegoat today have the Al and by Prud for Staunton ' Graham and for been Grimard hear the works Guy from wise senator and Lynch too long to of those frantic a wars a need this a time Charbonneau - a buried accomplishments in John , of of especially Senators beginning glad cataloguing
 time Senators especially and long hear scapegoat . John the today Prud Charbonneau - Graham this been from accomplishments wars for need Guy for good the Lynch the to in whose Senators of a buried of too in those cataloguing , of and glad and have I of ' senator Staunton frantic homme a a beginning wise , by Al a house works Grimard
The sharpest barbs, we must agree, were aimed by politicians like ourselves. 
 barbs , . like by must were politicians aimed sharpest , agree ourselves we The
 aimed must , politicians ourselves like barbs The agree we by were , sharpest .
 , must aimed politicians . by barbs , we ourselves were agree like The sharpest
 agree The sharpest like politicians by ourselves , we , must were . aimed barbs
 we sharpest , , politicians by were ourselves like agree aimed must barbs . The
 ourselves aimed were . agree we sharpest must The by barbs , , politicians like
 must agree . , by The politicians , we were ourselves barbs sharpest aimed like
 , barbs ourselves . aimed must sharpest politicians like , The we agree by were
 sharpest barbs aimed like , were politicians must , ourselves agree by we The .
 agree . aimed were politicians , by sharpest , we must ourselves The like barbs
 must The barbs by . ourselves we sharpest like aimed , , agree politicians were
 The like sharpest aimed we ourselves . politicians , must barbs , by were agree
 The politicians agree ourselves sharpest like were by , . must barbs we , aimed
 , aimed ourselves must , politicians . The by we barbs sharpest like agree were
 aimed barbs were The sharpest agree by , ourselves , politicians we must like .
 like barbs we . politicians agree , by The sharpest aimed were ourselves must ,
Constitutional amendments affect all Canadians, even if their immediate impact is felt in only one region of the country. 
They must not be treated lightly, particularly as they affect minorities. 
The federation's value lies in this country's historic respect for the individuality of minorities and for their desire not to have this individuality crushed by the numerical weight of the majority.  
What we are being asked to do in the final analysis is remove constitutionally guaranteed rights, as discriminatory as they may be by today's standards, and entrust them to a province which will honour them for a given period, with no guarantee that they will be incorporated on a permanent basis. 
The National Assembly has endorsed this unanimously, as did most witnesses who stayed with the issue, with varying degrees of enthusiasm. 
Prominent legal experts even argued that various Supreme Court decisions have interpreted section 93 in such a way that it has lost much of its significance.  
All this may be true, but there are still Quebecers who feel that by adopting the resolution they will be abandoned by the very Parliament whose responsibility it is to protect them.  
I wish to end my remarks by quoting from an opinion which was given to the Quebec government by what is known as the Catholic Committee of the Education Council of the province of Quebec, a consultative body which is asked to give its views on issues affecting the Catholic religion in schools. 
This opinion was written and delivered following the hearings of the joint committee. 
It is very pertinent that we are all aware of them.  
I wish to quote from four paragraphs, and I am not quoting them out of context, as the sentiment in the four paragraphs I will quote reflect the tone of the entire paper. 
The implications of the constitutional amendment requested by the Quebec government are not easy to interpret or measure accurately. 
Concerns and objections have been expressed, particularly by the English Catholic and French Protestant minorities. 
Experts in constitutional law have said that the amendment could have a surprising impact, far beyond the limited effects usually referred to in the media. 
The public may have trouble grasping the real scope of what is happening or making its views known because it does not have access to the necessary information and means of communication. 
It must therefore be acknowledged that if Parliament grants the request, public support for the amendment is less certain than support for the creation of linguistic school boards....  
Bill 109 - 
- which is the Quebec Education Act passed in June - 
- upholds the principle of freedom of choice in schooling. 
However, the debates of the Joint Committee of the House of Commons and Senate highlighted the fact that the legislation in this area will be jeopardized the moment Quebec is excluded from the application of subsections 1 to 4 of section 93. 
 The sharpest , we must agree , were aimed by politicians like ourselves .
 aimed . we , sharpest , by agree barbs like The ourselves politicians must
 we , . barbs ourselves by sharpest politicians like were The agree aimed ,
 politicians aimed barbs . were we sharpest by The , agree , ourselves must
For that, the price of absolution will be steep. 
 that steep . For price will absolution , be the of
 . will , the absolution that price steep of be For
 will the price For absolution , steep . be of that
 steep of , be For absolution the will price . that
 steep be of For price absolution , . that will the
 . steep the that , For of price will be absolution
 that absolution . of , the steep For price be will
 price . be of , absolution the that steep For will
 For price that . , be steep absolution will of the
 price steep absolution . the be , that of will For
 , that price the will . absolution be For steep of
 that steep price will , For of the . be absolution
 the be absolution of will price . For steep , that
 steep absolution will of the that price be For , .
 steep price For be . the that absolution will , of
 price . the that For will of absolution steep be ,
Senate committees are less partisan, more thorough and more careful. 
Joint committees are a compromise, but I am confident that the Senate's practice of care and attention was, for the most part, adopted in the work of the special joint committee on the Quebec school question.  
It is true, as senators have pointed out, that the special joint committee was given a short time-frame to make its recommendations. 
However, committee members were assiduous in assuring all points of view were heard, unlike the Government of Quebec which chose not to have public hearings. 
This made our task doubly difficult.  
As senators, we are unlike any other evidence-gathering body. 
We gather evidence, we serve as our own advisors, seek our own counsel, we become judges, and we become the jury. 
We are the supreme court of the land when it comes to legislation. 
We must view the evidence before committees with care. 
I urge all senators, before they vote, to carefully review the full transcript of the evidence.  
Let me say at the outset that I was very sceptical, particularly after having read the Quebec resolution which was adopted unanimously in the Quebec Assembly, save for two abstentions, and which was quickly passed by the Quebec assembly requesting the federal government amend section 93 of the Constitution by deleting the subsections in so far as their application pertains to Quebec. 
These sections were incorporated in the British North American Act, 1867. 
The Quebec resolution in its fourth recital gave the Quebec assembly's opinion that the proposed amendment to section 93 requested in no way constituted recognition by the Quebec assembly of the Constitution Act, 1982, which was adopted without its consent.  
Honourable senators, noticing as you must that I am and remain a staunch supporter of the Constitution Act, 1982, this caused me great personal grief and concern.  
The first hurdle I had to overcome was whether or not the wording of the Quebec resolution on its face was so invidious, so egregious and so inconsistent that the recital made it inoperable and, in the process, would defeat its own request to amend the 1867 provisions by the mechanisms of the 1982 Constitution.  
I asked myself how the Province of Quebec could be asking for an amendment to the Constitution contained in the 1867 British North America Act, which was now part of the 1982 Constitution, while recognizing that the only methodology available to Parliament would be via the Constitution Act, 1982.  
Section 43 of the 1982 Constitution contains bilateral amendment processes between the federal government and provinces where their interests are solely engaged. 
Clearly, the only highway, the only path the Government of Quebec or the assembly of Quebec could take to achieve its objective was via the 1982 Constitution.  
Honourable senators, I then examined the federal resolution, which is the one we are being asked to consider. 
The federal resolution differs substantially from the Quebec resolutions. 
 For that , the price of absolution be steep .
 be steep For . the will price that , absolution
 be that price , . For absolution steep the of
 absolution of price For . , steep the will be
Almost equal penance will be demanded for the people of the media who joined the search for evidence that was never found to support these wild accusations.  
 be these penance found will Almost people for the of was who to the wild evidence never accusations . for support media equal that demanded joined the search
 the to Almost media the penance equal for wild demanded these support will found joined the never who of accusations be that search . evidence people for was
 equal that search the for for Almost evidence the these support penance the accusations people of was joined will . who to wild be demanded found media never
 Almost will joined equal the media for the these be wild who never evidence that the penance demanded to was search accusations people found of for support .
 found be of demanded for joined that search support will the was Almost never these wild the the . penance accusations equal who to people media for evidence
 accusations never search joined Almost be that will support the penance these who for for the found evidence of . equal demanded the media was wild people to
 joined support evidence the will found accusations for was media that to for penance search these be equal the Almost never who of demanded the . wild people
 the be media the will wild . for that evidence to support Almost search was people found for joined accusations demanded of equal who the never these penance
 will people be equal for media penance . found demanded never search support evidence of was accusations Almost joined the these the the for that wild who to
 people these media never the Almost that of demanded . penance accusations equal the will was the joined be wild to search support who for for evidence found
 joined search support for for found never equal was demanded be the Almost to . media the the accusations evidence wild that of these will people who penance
 search joined will never the support the demanded media that these the Almost who be people wild evidence penance found for for was of . equal to accusations
 Almost the media found wild who these that equal for never the . for evidence demanded accusations support be to was people search joined the of penance will
 was people be search Almost who demanded of never the joined that found accusations for these penance equal media the support to wild the will evidence for .
 demanded equal who never accusations people these the for evidence of joined search for penance support that Almost media . found was the be wild the to will
 accusations for these who demanded of will evidence . to search Almost for was equal media wild found people never the be the penance support the that joined
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
I thank the honourable Senator DeWare for doing the mathematics for me. 
I only wish I had done it myself prior to coming into the Senate today. 
I would be happy to investigate the reasons why those particular numbers appear in the manner in which she has presented them.  
Senator DeWare :
I appreciate that. 
It will not matter that we are less able to raise money than the so-called "have provinces."  
Honourable senators, because the population of the Atlantic provinces is not growing as fast as Ontario, Alberta or British Columbia, the smaller provinces will get less cash while the larger ones will get more. 
The $12.5 billion figure is prorated by provincial population.  
Will the government consider the way it calculates transfer payments to ensure that cash transfers to Atlantic Canada, Saskatchewan and Manitoba do not decline any further?  
Senator Graham :
I shall certainly bring those very legitimate concerns to the attention of the responsible minister.  
Environment 
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Support by Provinces of Government Position taken at Kyoto-Request for Particulars 
Hon. Mira Spivak :
Honourable senators, on December 1, the federal government proposed that Canada's position at the Kyoto meeting on global climate change would be that developed countries should target 2010 emissions that are 3 per cent below 1990 levels and that Canada should reach the 1990 levels by 2007.  
Given the consultation process preceding Kyoto, could the Leader of the Government tell us which provinces and territories support the position that the federal government is currently advancing in Kyoto, and could he also tell us which ones do not support this position?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, if I were in Kyoto I would be able to offer Senator Spivak a more definitive answer. 
I know that the Province of Alberta is well represented in Kyoto, as the Honourable Senator Ghitter has alluded to in the past.  
 Almost equal penance will be demanded for the people of the media who joined the search evidence that was never found to support these wild accusations .
 people the never the penance demanded for will equal joined media was be accusations of search . evidence the Almost these who to support for that wild
 be was found never will equal . the who people joined search wild demanded Almost accusations penance that support the to for for the evidence media of
 Almost the to . the accusations evidence will people support media wild was equal who that never for joined the be penance demanded of search found for
When I came to the Senate, I found Senator Charbonneau to be a willing guide and confidante - a calm and calming influence upon the chamber. 
 guide came Senate and Charbonneau the - . to I influence be chamber calming calm and confidante When willing a to found , a upon the I Senator
 the I When calming . upon a I and to willing guide confidante calm , came influence found the Senate and a - be Charbonneau Senator to chamber
 I and chamber Senate Charbonneau to and came a influence found willing the When confidante calm calming the a to I upon Senator . be - guide ,
 to be calm and guide . upon I a to came Senator found Senate confidante influence chamber the willing , Charbonneau a I calming and When - the
 I . Senate found and guide to a came influence the - , the Charbonneau I willing chamber to and confidante When be Senator calm upon calming a
 , came influence be chamber found I and Charbonneau When the willing guide calming Senate upon confidante Senator and a the calm I to - a . to
 the to When confidante a Senator I Senate calm , the upon and willing Charbonneau to . influence and I be came - found guide calming chamber a
 I , influence confidante to be Charbonneau I calm - upon the the found and a Senate came When Senator a chamber willing and guide to calming .
 the be Senate Charbonneau came - willing to calming and Senator . chamber I found upon confidante calm guide influence When to a a and the I ,
 I be Senate found calming a Charbonneau chamber - and , guide and the a When . Senator I willing influence came the to upon confidante calm to
 be . influence I to - calm a I Senator When upon a calming found and the guide chamber the came Charbonneau willing , Senate confidante and to
 - Senator When be and the calm I confidante a upon came to chamber , . to and guide I a Charbonneau found calming willing Senate influence the
 to chamber When I a and a I found guide calming and came Charbonneau upon . the influence willing calm , Senator be the - Senate to confidante
 guide to I the , came the found and Charbonneau When and calm Senate Senator influence to a I - confidante be a chamber . willing calming upon
 I to Charbonneau and guide a Senator . the to influence found the came When a - and upon I calm chamber calming willing confidante Senate be ,
 Senator chamber willing calm found Senate confidante be to and When upon calming a to I guide I came influence and a . Charbonneau - the the ,
There was a great number of working people, and lots of cash. 
They said, "We can throw it around." 
No one was thinking what would happen when people in the large demographic group turned 65.  
The amendments provided for the elimination of CPP children's benefits which previously applied - they changed it again - where more than four children of a deceased or disabled contributor had been eligible for such benefits. 
Now, if you have more than four kids, that is fine, too. 
However, it was another increased cost to what should be a pension plan. 
The government should have taken the money out of something else, or increased the amount of CPP premiums so that people were told the truth, and also told, "To pay for this it will cost you 10 cents or 20 cents more a month." 
The cash was there, so they used that cash.  
Legislation was enacted for spousal credits. 
When people get divorced, they have to keep up with the times. 
They can split the benefits. 
That was not done before. 
At the inception of this program, that was not allowed.  
Because men die earlier and women live longer, the money went mostly to women. 
It costs more money. 
I am not saying that is bad. 
I am just saying that all of a sudden it costs more money because women are either lucky or live better or cleaner lives than men, and they live longer.  
Senator Gigantès :
They survive us. 
It takes strength and intelligence.  
 When I came to the Senate , I found Senator Charbonneau to be a willing guide and confidante - a calm and influence upon the chamber .
 confidante influence a . chamber calm guide upon calming - Senate I to found the Charbonneau , and I When be came Senator to willing a the
 calming found I came a confidante to influence upon and Charbonneau chamber be and - the , . to I the Senator a When guide calm willing
 calming a the found to came Senator willing , . Charbonneau calm I Senate When be chamber and upon confidante the I guide and influence - a
As his reputation grew with his competence in the job of Speaker, his availability as a target advanced. 
 a of the grew , in job target with his . availability his as competence his advanced reputation Speaker As
 job as his his the with in competence a target availability Speaker reputation advanced of his . , As grew
 , Speaker with as a grew of availability his his . reputation his advanced competence job As in target the
 target Speaker grew his in reputation As job the of . his competence advanced his , availability as with a
 competence Speaker his in , his as grew of reputation availability job . As target the with a his advanced
 in availability as target Speaker the a his his grew competence reputation , job of advanced his . As with
 . job target As a with availability reputation Speaker , competence as the his grew advanced his of in his
 Speaker . of with , advanced grew competence as his availability in job target his As reputation a the his
 , a in competence reputation of his grew advanced with availability as target . his his Speaker job the As
 job the with of a , reputation as in . his advanced his As competence target availability grew his Speaker
 his . his target Speaker availability of grew competence As reputation with , in as the his a job advanced
 availability with a Speaker reputation As , his of . competence his grew target advanced the in as job his
 As a target with his the grew as advanced his his competence Speaker reputation job of , . availability in
 his grew Speaker the as his availability As , advanced his target of job . reputation with a in competence
 advanced As his his Speaker grew his , with job availability . of in the as a reputation target competence
 a competence the availability Speaker job grew with his his , advanced of in reputation . target his As as
Canadians are unaware of what is happening, in particular our young people who will be the most affected and the most mistreated. 
We owe it to them, our grandchildren and our children, to study this legislation thoroughly and to amend it, because it is not their fault that this program has been so badly managed. 
They will have little chance of collecting under the CPP, hence the changes the government intends to make.  
We are simply shovelling our hard-earned money into the greedy hands of Paul Martin, Minister of Finance, who wants to be the man who slays the deficit dragon, and we know how he intends to do it. 
He has followed three policy themes to accomplish that end.  
First, he has transferred much of the tax burden to the provinces, forcing what I call "downloaded increased taxes." 
Provincial and municipal governments, who were receiving less money, had to increase taxes. 
The government transferred debt.  
Second, this government has taken advantage of the low interest rates which resulted from the efforts of the Conservative government over eight years to bring the deficit and inflation under control and to bring interest rates down.  
Third, Paul Martin then not only raised licence fees and taxes, he used the accumulated surplus in the EI fund to pay down the deficit. 
It is this third policy theme with which we, on this side, feel most uncomfortable. 
He used the surplus in the EI fund, not to extend benefits, not to reduce premiums - which is normally what is done in a payroll deduction - but to cut benefits for a totally separate policy objective. 
He used this payroll tax purely and simply, to achieve his policy goal of cutting the deficit.  
That is why the Auditor General is prohibited from examining the fund unless the directors of the fund agree. 
It should not be for the directors to agree or disagree. 
Parliament must insist that the Auditor General report to us on the fund and on its administration. 
However, the Auditor General will report to the directors of the fund on how they manage their affairs. 
That is not acceptable.  
We are talking of $100 billion by the year 2006, and rapid increases thereafter. 
On this record, it will fail.  
 As his reputation grew with his competence in the job of Speaker , his availability a target advanced .
 Speaker his target reputation the with availability . advanced his in job his , competence as of a As
 target his , his as job reputation in . the with Speaker a of As his grew advanced competence
 a As with job Speaker target as his his reputation . grew his in competence advanced availability , the
As a newspaper writer and editor, I believed in the good work the fourth estate could do in muckraking, but the work is delicate and requires a careful capacity to acknowledge eventually that a cold trail sometimes means that no trail exists.  
 work As the , editor trail means no the in that the , that capacity writer trail careful cold could estate to fourth in sometimes believed but good and I do delicate exists work eventually and acknowledge . muckraking a a is a newspaper requires
 careful but the good , eventually muckraking in the delicate a no acknowledge work means believed exists As that and the , trail and capacity is do newspaper could estate sometimes trail work requires that writer . to cold I fourth a a in editor
 the careful in the exists newspaper is a that work could that . requires eventually do a a editor work acknowledge cold muckraking the delicate and sometimes and As means trail writer I , in no capacity estate good trail , to fourth believed but
 do fourth a careful exists eventually and means , believed , the trail could a in estate good work . that and newspaper work a I but muckraking acknowledge the no requires is delicate As trail that cold capacity writer editor in sometimes to the
 in cold writer careful that newspaper trail acknowledge a work requires fourth delicate is but As a muckraking a editor capacity the do believed trail means and in eventually the that exists good . estate to I could the , work no , sometimes and
 could means work a in is do careful estate the . , and a no As trail exists trail newspaper to and capacity cold requires work I fourth writer the that in the eventually , that but a delicate believed muckraking good acknowledge sometimes editor
 the and a acknowledge means careful in I eventually writer in delicate . a requires good As cold trail capacity is could exists work editor no to work fourth muckraking , that that estate the trail the sometimes but do believed a , and newspaper
 , could acknowledge cold to that I do requires in a a believed that exists work newspaper delicate trail work good no the . editor in capacity estate muckraking the eventually trail sometimes but and As fourth is and the a , careful means writer
 sometimes eventually and in is and a requires the estate means good believed to muckraking , could but work a acknowledge the As the writer that careful a work capacity that do in newspaper , fourth exists trail I cold delicate trail . editor no
 that . , that to a newspaper work is acknowledge sometimes careful good in delicate requires editor I trail a work trail the means cold , estate writer eventually in fourth believed do and but could capacity As muckraking the exists no the and a
 a but , work is trail acknowledge newspaper believed could fourth I work . delicate that exists sometimes a capacity cold good the means requires a in in no trail , estate muckraking the and do that to the and writer editor careful As eventually
 do work sometimes exists the that trail to cold newspaper . and means acknowledge a capacity believed trail editor good but , the As a a could muckraking eventually that delicate , careful fourth writer no and the work in in is estate I requires
 As a work in exists the good that work muckraking cold capacity estate the and , do trail . I writer fourth to editor delicate newspaper believed is requires sometimes trail in a , that careful acknowledge could means and no eventually the a but
 muckraking believed work , editor a a trail that careful requires a is delicate cold As estate good exists means . to in in acknowledge fourth the but the sometimes that do , trail the newspaper no work could and writer capacity eventually I and
 requires a believed estate trail no and is As eventually . the capacity fourth newspaper a good in trail I and editor work that cold a work , but writer delicate to exists acknowledge in , do that careful muckraking could the means the sometimes
 exists good capacity trail . cold delicate eventually fourth acknowledge the that believed As estate careful , but work a editor that muckraking could to work do sometimes means , is a and writer the no newspaper in trail I in and requires a the
Honourable senators, I am trying to follow practice and procedure in the Senate. 
I am addressing the report of the special joint committee. 
For me, the question is elucidation for honourable senators to consider that report. 
To me, the evidence and the outcome are clear. 
There may be evidence in other places, and there may be views held by other people, but I had the evidence before the committee. 
I would not say it was totally unequivocal, but it was clear enough to satisfy me that there was a high enough hurdle having been passed to support the federal resolution. 
That is what I have said in my speech. 
Read the evidence. 
Read the transcript. 
It is clear.  
Senator Bolduc :
Honourable senators, I have listened to your arguments attentively. 
You have argued your case like good lawyers. 
There is no doubt about that. 
What you said basically is that it is up to Quebec to address its education problem and decide whether there will be guarantees of denominational education in the schools. 
You say it is a provincial problem. 
In my speech, I have said that there is no guarantee whatsoever that that is what will happen. 
But the right to dissentience that was guaranteed under section 93 of the Constitution will no longer be protected. 
The opinion of the Parti Québécois on this is known, and that is why it is a bit awkward.  
Senator Grafstein :
 As a newspaper writer and editor , I believed in the good work the fourth estate could do in muckraking , but the work is delicate and requires a capacity to acknowledge eventually that a cold trail sometimes means that no trail exists .
 in newspaper is and muckraking , in delicate means careful I writer no to estate trail eventually the a the do trail acknowledge the requires . work exists a , that work could fourth good cold a editor As believed capacity but and that
 As cold sometimes I , do writer means the careful that capacity the newspaper acknowledge a and estate muckraking the requires in work is a . believed to eventually a could but no and trail fourth delicate that exists editor , good trail work
 no believed editor is that that and a writer requires trail newspaper do and sometimes estate . exists cold , in eventually muckraking but the good fourth a acknowledge in As delicate , capacity the work careful work a to the I trail means
w (1540) 
 1540 ( w )
 w 1540 ( )
 ( ) w 1540
 1540 w ) (
 ) ( w 1540
 w 1540 ) (
 ) 1540 ( w
 w ( 1540 )
 w ) ( 1540
 ( ) 1540 w
 ) ( 1540 w
 1540 w ( )
 ( w ) 1540
 w ) 1540 (
 w ( 1540 )
 w ( 1540 )
As a result, it tended to stray from the substance of the reference before it. 
"Religious education," "religious instruction," "denominational schools," "confessional schools," "linguistic rights," "minority rights" and other terms were used so often that they tended to become interchangeable to the point that they occasionally melded together.  
Section 93 was a result of a compromise at a time when two religious beliefs dominated everyday life in Canada to an extent hard to describe today when even one's most difficult moral decisions are usually self-determined, rather than imposed without question by a recognized higher authority. 
In 1867, Catholics and Protestants were guaranteed certain privileges which were not even considered for other religious denominations. 
Their numbers and influences were such that the idea that a section 93 was nothing else but a deserved right did not even arise.  
In the early 1980s, when a Canadian constitution was being debated, section 93 remained as it was written in 1867, despite the fact that Canadian society had evolved to the point where the debate we are now having should have been held then. 
Even more to the point, the authors of the Constitution Act recognized that section 93's limitations to two privileged Christian beliefs would conflict with the Charter's anti-discrimination implications, so much so that section 93 was provided immunity from the Charter in section 29. 
Indeed, section 29 could not be clearer. 
It reads as follows: 
Nothing in this Charter abrogates or derogates from any rights or privileges guaranteed by or under the Constitution of Canada in respect of denominational, separate or dissentient schools.  
Why the issue of confessional schools as well as other issues crying out for change, such as Senate reform, were left untouched during the long debate before and during patriation and surrounding the Constitution Act itself is for those who were there at the time to explain. 
Certainly a golden opportunity was lost to give Canada a basic law more in tune with modern Canadian society, except for the adoption of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 
Even it is not without its flaws, not the least being the notwithstanding clause which can be subjected to abuse. 
Perhaps all of this is a reflection of the one constant which has marked Canada since its origins, a country identified by its extraordinary political and social diversity and contradictions.  
In any event, we are faced with a request from the Quebec National Assembly to be removed from the obligations to maintain formal Catholic and Protestant school structures in the cities of Montreal and Quebec City and to maintain minority or dissentient Catholic and Protestant schools outside those areas at the request of minority Catholic or Protestant parents, as the case may be. 
Provincial legislation to establish linguistic schools is already being put into effect. 
These can be established without amending section 93. 
Quebec, however, points out that to have multiple school systems can only lead to overlapping, duplication, and confusion, with all their attendant additional costs.  
In addition, religious education as provided for in section 93 is reconfirmed in the province's Education Act, which by itself may be reassuring at first glance, but not in reality as it is a protection which is simply not as iron-clad as a constitutional guarantee.  
When the Education Act, Bill 107, was passed in 1994, the National Assembly agreed to apply the notwithstanding clause so that the privileges given to denominations in section 93 could not be successfully challenged under the Charter. 
 w ( 1540
 w ( 1540
 1540 ) w
 1540 ) (
In his time, Senator Charbonneau has encountered graver dangers than those that pursued him in the battles in this house. 
 dangers Charbonneau In graver in encountered that battles time , in those him his than . this pursued the Senator house has
 his this that house pursued graver in battles dangers him those In Senator , time encountered has the in than Charbonneau .
 time those his . in the that than graver , house pursued Senator this Charbonneau in encountered dangers him In has battles
 dangers In battles time Charbonneau Senator house those graver him has encountered his than . , in pursued this that the in
 graver time dangers , than Senator . the him his In pursued that this encountered those battles has in house Charbonneau in
 than this , house that in the his dangers . pursued in him those time Charbonneau In graver Senator has battles encountered
 that in dangers than , . this Senator house has In Charbonneau battles pursued in him those time the graver encountered his
 , encountered the than that Senator . pursued in those has this in Charbonneau In house him dangers graver battles his time
 those , this than time . pursued Senator in that him In his has battles the house graver dangers Charbonneau encountered in
 the , In in Senator . Charbonneau house pursued graver that than dangers encountered has his battles him time those this in
 those house his In than in in . Charbonneau , the has graver encountered him that pursued Senator battles time dangers this
 encountered pursued his . battles dangers the In than him , Charbonneau that graver in time in this house those has Senator
 in . has those time battles in graver house the dangers Senator that pursued his than In encountered Charbonneau , him this
 dangers Charbonneau In that in Senator his has house graver encountered battles . those , this time him pursued in than the
 the Charbonneau Senator In . him graver battles this time those dangers house that in his , pursued encountered has than in
 graver , has dangers encountered In than Senator his him . in that in those house the battles Charbonneau pursued time this
Detention Facilities for Refugee Claimants-Request for Particulars 
Fisheries and Oceans 
Negotiations on Multilateral Agreement on Investment-Continuation of Limit on Foreign Ownership of Commercial Licences-Government Position 
National Defence 
Search and Rescue Helicopter Replacement Program-Possible Cabinet Discussion on Awarding Contract for Helicopter Purchase-Government Position 
Search and Rescue Helicopter Replacement Program-State of Sea King Helicopter Fleet-Government Position 
Federal-Provincial Relations 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Atlantic Provinces Equal to Increase in Social Transfers-Government Position 
Delayed Answers to Oral Questions 
Human Resources Development 
Changes to Canada Pension Plan-Accountability and Transparency of Investment Board-Undertaking to Publish Quarterly Financial Statements-Government Position 
Changes to Canada Pension Plan-Investment Board Not Subject to Access to Information Act-Government Position 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
Commemoration of Fiftieth Anniversary-Plans of Government 
Activities planned around December 10, 1997 for the launch of the 50th Anniversary commemorative year of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) 
National Defence 
Lack of Helicopter for Number of Navy Frigates-Government Position 
Forestry 
Demolition of Government Laboratories-Possibility of Restoration of Funding-Government Position 
Answers to Order Paper Questions Tabled 
 In his time , Senator Charbonneau has encountered graver dangers those that pursued him in the battles in this house .
 Senator . In battles graver pursued , encountered house has Charbonneau that in time than those his this dangers the in
 in house Charbonneau has In encountered Senator battles his that time this those pursued in graver than the dangers him ,
 Senator in house than pursued those in has , this him time encountered battles the In dangers Charbonneau . his that
Like Senator Lynch-Staunton, I pray that his future will be as was his past, calm and calming.  
 Like , will that Staunton Lynch future his his was past Senator calm pray , . and - be as calming I
 his , Senator and , will be . that his as Staunton future I past Like calm Lynch - pray was calming
 past - as and calming calm Staunton , will . Senator pray I was future his , be Like that his Lynch
 be as Lynch I calming that Like . was past his , Staunton calm will Senator his - and future pray ,
 be pray that was I and as - Lynch . calm , his , will calming future his past Senator Like Staunton
 I Staunton calming . future calm that past his pray , as and Like will was - Lynch , his be Senator
 his I - past Lynch future pray will , was that calming calm , and . Like Senator as be his Staunton
 was , will past his - . Senator Staunton and pray as future , Like I that calming Lynch be calm his
 past I calm as that his Lynch will be future and pray - Like . , was Senator Staunton his , calming
 pray his past , Like will calm future . , and Lynch Senator calming be I his was as Staunton that -
 Like his will that calm . - Staunton be was and , past calming pray , I Lynch Senator as his future
 be calming , pray will Like and was I past . future Senator Staunton his calm his , that Lynch - as
 Senator - be that will his pray as his Lynch future I Like . calm and Staunton calming , was past ,
 - his was that , future his be calming past Staunton , I will Lynch as and Senator calm . Like pray
 will pray , Like Staunton his - was , calm and his calming Lynch be I that past future . Senator as
 Senator Lynch pray calm past Staunton future his that . , calming , his be I was Like will as and -
The negotiations are in a state of flux at the present time and it might be premature for me to speculate on what the outcome might be.  
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Target Year for Implementation of Government Position taken at Kyoto-Government Position 
Hon. Mira Spivak :
I thank the Leader of the Government for his answer. 
I should like to point out that Manitoba is distinct from Alberta, as are all provinces.  
In their December 1 announcement, the government also revealed that not until 1999 would they be able to provide more detail as to the costs and specific actions that would be required to meet our Kyoto commitments. 
Assuming that it will take some time to implement the actions that the government will propose in 1999, it could be the year 2000, 2001, 2002 or 2003 before the government takes steps to meet its Kyoto targets. 
Some of these actions will undoubtedly entail negotiations and agreements with provincial governments, which means it could be as late as 2006 before the government can meet the targets which were set out.  
Perhaps the Leader of the Government in the Senate could tell us in which year implementation of the Kyoto decisions will begin, because, surely, that must have been taken into consideration prior to the Kyoto meeting.  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Yes, honourable senators, discussions were held, and consideration was given to when the new objectives or conclusions of the Kyoto conference might be put in place, or kick into place, if I may use that terminology.  
I do not believe a final agreement has been reached on that. 
I know that the Government of Canada will cooperate with the provinces and territories and, in partnership with industry, the environmental groups and individual Canadians, develop a practical, flexible, step-by-step plan for reducing emissions. 
Many economic analyses of potential costs attributable to taking action to reduce emissions have been done, but no conclusions have been reached respecting timing or actual costs.  
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Informetrica Study on Meeting Targets-Government Position 
Hon. Mira Spivak :
Honourable senators, late last week, the consulting firm Informetrica released a study entitled, "The Scale of the Challenge for Reducing Canadian Greenhouse Gas Emissions." 
This report states: 
We conclude that there is almost no chance of meeting this goal in Canada under any reasonable economic scenario...  
And I stress this last part: 
 Like Senator Lynch - Staunton , I pray that his will be as was his past , calm and calming .
 his future past and be pray calm , will Staunton Like was his Lynch . Senator I as , calming that
 Lynch his as calming , Like , be - that I his Senator future calm past . pray was and will
 his pray Staunton Lynch his past was . , Like calming , I - calm will that and as future Senator
In the meantime, I hope that he might see some humour in a poem by Herbert Lench Pottle: 
 Herbert : the hope meantime in , a by might he In some humour I Pottle Lench see poem that
 meantime by Pottle Herbert Lench that I he hope see : a humour the In poem , in some might
 , the meantime might that Lench poem I humour hope Herbert he some by see in In a : Pottle
 humour some : in by Herbert might I , meantime Pottle the Lench poem hope he see a that In
 humour the hope that Lench meantime might poem In in by a see , Herbert : some Pottle he I
 poem see Lench that Pottle a : the Herbert , some hope in humour In meantime I by he might
 hope Herbert humour : in might meantime see that In a I some Lench he poem Pottle , the by
 Lench see the : poem meantime some a , humour hope Pottle I in In that he might Herbert by
 I humour by , in poem meantime a the he Pottle some might : see Lench Herbert that In hope
 a that he : meantime Herbert Lench hope I in might humour Pottle some In poem , see by the
 : poem a Pottle some Lench by , he hope In might see that the meantime in I humour Herbert
 , Herbert that he I a humour hope : in In might poem meantime see by the Pottle some Lench
 hope the , : Lench meantime humour Herbert Pottle by poem some In see might a that he I in
 Lench Herbert Pottle that in I he some In see meantime , might by poem hope the : a humour
 meantime the Pottle I poem humour by In , see Lench that Herbert a : might some he in hope
 some might by he Herbert meantime poem humour , Pottle I a the see hope in : In Lench that
Paragraphs (1) to (4) of section 93 do not apply to Quebec." 
CITATION 
2. This Amendment may be cited as the Constitution Amendment (year of proclamation) (Quebec).  
The special joint committee on which I have the honour to sit was given the mandate of studying the proposed amendment to section 93. 
Today, we have before us the resolution to amend section 93 of the Constitution Act, 1867.  
Briefly put, I support this resolution. 
I am also convinced that the majority of Catholic parents in Quebec who enjoy the guarantees provided under section 93 support this amendment, as do the majority of Protestant parents, who are in the same situation.  
However, the Quebec National Assembly will no longer be subject to legislation predating Confederation with respect to denominational instruction.  
These laws of Quebec that predate Confederation and concern Catholic and Protestant denominational schools have led to the creation of an unusual system, which gave Catholic and Protestant parents different rights, according to where they lived in the province.  
Catholic and Protestant school boards are thus to be found protected by the Constitution within the old limits of Montreal and Quebec City. 
Elsewhere in the province the Catholic school boards are not protected by the Constitution, except in predominantly Protestant districts, where Catholic parents are in the minority.  
Outside Montreal and Quebec City, the Constitution protects Protestant school boards if, in a district with a Catholic majority, the Protestant parents are in the minority.  
Honourable senators, educational reform has been a concern of Quebec governments for over 30 years. 
And one of the subjects that keeps coming back, since the publication of the Parent report in the 1960s, is the establishment of school boards on the basis of Canada's two official languages. 
The ongoing challenge was to reconcile linguistic school boards with the constitutional guarantee protecting Catholic and Protestant school boards in Montreal and Quebec City. 
Even though the Supreme Court approved the system contemplated in Bill 107, the theoretical coexistence of linguistic and denominational school boards proved impracticable.  
Obviously, it is primarily in Montreal that it appears most difficult to set up linguistic school boards without having to support an overlap and interpenetration of structures. 
Lorraine Pagé, of the Centrale de l'enseignement du Québec, testified before the committee that, in Montreal: 
...we would have a francophone school board that would include a Catholic sector, a Protestant sector, and another sector; we would also have an anglophone school board which would have a Catholic sector, a Protestant sector and another sector, and in addition to that there would be a Catholic school board - there are so many it gets confusing - where services would have to be offered to francophones and anglophones, and another school board for Protestants, where services would be offered to francophones and anglophones.  
This means that there would be at least four mandatory and separate school boards, including two with three mandatory sectors each and two others with two mandatory sectors each. 
 In the meantime , I hope that he might see some humour in a poem by Herbert Lench :
 : the In see some he that I Pottle meantime by might Herbert hope , poem a in humour
 Herbert meantime he a that some Pottle poem see the by , : I might Lench hope In in
 : he humour I Lench that poem Pottle Herbert some see , might meantime in the hope by a
The rain descendeth from above 
 The above from descendeth rain
 above rain The from descendeth
 above from rain descendeth The
 rain The from above descendeth
 above from rain descendeth The
 rain above descendeth from The
 rain descendeth The from above
 above rain descendeth The from
 rain descendeth above from The
 from The rain descendeth above
 The descendeth rain from above
 from rain The descendeth above
 The from rain above descendeth
 descendeth The above rain from
 descendeth from above The rain
 descendeth rain from The above
However, seniors do not know about it, and this will be another huge tax grab - Merry Christmas, Canada - by the Liberal Government and Paul Martin. 
Twice they have killed plans to increase the RRSP contribution limits so that people could put money away for their future given that the government will not provide for them.  
The Canadian Association of Retired Persons says that as many as 80,000 Canadians may fail to convert their RRSPs on time. 
Where are the big advertising programs of the Government of Canada which they mount when they really want to advertise something? 
This is a government program they do not want to advertise. 
They want it to slip in, just like this bill, so that people will not know and will not make the proper financial decisions, but instead will be exposed to a huge tax load for the year 1997. 
That is what Paul Martin wants, so that in February he can brag in his budget speech about how he has cleaned up the deficit - on the backs of the unemployed, on the backs of senior citizens, and on the backs of young people who will be paying the $400 million to the new pension plan.  
Senator Gigantès :
That is because over nine years you did nothing to address the deficit.  
Senator Tkachuk :
That is not true.  
The only reason the federal government is dealing with the situation now is that the minister of finance at the time, Michael Wilson, obtained an agreement that created a certain situation. 
There is a word in law for something from which one cannot extricate oneself, and where a decision must be made. 
That is why they have an agreement today. 
We tried to get it done in 1986.  
Senator Gigantès :
And you failed. 
You could not do it.  
Senator Tkachuk :
Because the Liberals would not agree. 
 The rain descendeth from
 rain The above from
 rain descendeth above from
 above descendeth The from
Upon the just and unjust fellow; 
 and the ; Upon just unjust fellow
 Upon the ; just fellow and unjust
 ; fellow and unjust Upon the just
 just the Upon and unjust fellow ;
 fellow unjust and just Upon ; the
 unjust fellow the just ; Upon and
 just fellow ; unjust Upon the and
 and just unjust Upon the ; fellow
 the fellow ; unjust Upon just and
 unjust ; just the fellow and Upon
 Upon fellow ; unjust and just the
 fellow and ; the just unjust Upon
 the just fellow Upon and ; unjust
 fellow unjust ; just Upon and the
 Upon just ; and fellow unjust the
 just Upon fellow and the unjust ;
We are aware, of course, of the meetings that took place with the premiers in Calgary. 
We know there is a first ministers' conference later this week in Ottawa, at which this matter may or may not arise. 
However, I am not aware that there have been discussions, either formal or informal, between the Prime Minister and the premiers up to this point in time.  
Immigration 
Tracking and Detention of Unsuccessful Refugee Claimants-Government Position 
Hon. Donald H. Oliver :
Honourable senators, my question to the Leader of the Government in the Senate is a continuation of the line of questions I had for the honourable leader yesterday. 
Will the Leader of the Government tell this chamber what plans are being considered to detain those who are dangerous, or who are judged to be unlikely to depart of their own free will? 
Where will they be detained, and under what controls to ensure that Canadians are protected?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, I take my honourable friend's question seriously, as I did the questions he put yesterday. 
I am still attempting to obtain clarification for him on this matter as soon as possible.  
Detention Facilities for Refugee Claimants-Request for Particulars 
Hon. Donald H. Oliver :
As the honourable leader knows, the Department of Immigration maintains detention facilities across the country. 
Can he tell us how many refugee claimants are presently in detention, the number of centres, and the annual cost to Canadians to maintain these centres?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Fisheries and Oceans 
Negotiations on Multilateral Agreement on Investment-Continuation of Limit on Foreign Ownership of Commercial Licences-Government Position 
Hon. Gérald J. Comeau :
 Upon the just unjust fellow ;
 fellow the just and unjust Upon
 fellow just and Upon unjust ;
 just Upon ; and the unjust
But mostly on the just 
 But on the just mostly
 mostly the But just on
 on the mostly But just
 mostly on But the just
 mostly on the just But
 mostly the just on But
 just on But the mostly
 the just on mostly But
 mostly just But the on
 the But mostly on just
 the mostly just on But
 But mostly on just the
 But just mostly the on
 just But the on mostly
 on just But mostly the
 the mostly on just But
Search and Rescue Helicopter Replacement Program-State of Sea King Helicopter Fleet-Government Position 
Hon. J. Michael Forrestall :
Where are the other six? 
Are they on ships at sea? 
We have 30 in the inventory.  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, the answer is yes, there are 30 helicopters in the inventory. 
As I indicated yesterday, 24 were cleared, and six remain to be inspected. 
They will be inspected by December 18.  
Of the 24 that were inspected, only two were found to be in need of repair. 
As to precisely where the other six are located, I would need to consult with the appropriate authorities at National Defence. 
I will bring forward an answer for my honourable friend.  
Senator Forrestall :
Was there any criticism from our NATO allies with respect to the grounding of these aircraft? 
My understanding is that these aircraft are at sea, and a number of them are engaged in some training exercises. 
Were we criticized for not being able to live up to our obligations?  
Senator Graham :
Not to my knowledge. 
It is my understanding that those helicopters are at sea on exercises. 
As to precisely where they are, on whatever ocean, I cannot positively say. 
 But mostly on the
 just the on mostly
 the mostly But just
 the mostly on just
Because the unjust 
 Because unjust the
 Because unjust the
 the unjust Because
 the unjust Because
 the Because unjust
 unjust the Because
 Because unjust the
 the unjust Because
 the Because unjust
 the unjust Because
 the unjust Because
 unjust the Because
 Because the unjust
 unjust Because the
 unjust the Because
 the Because unjust
and whereas the National Assembly of Quebec has reaffirmed the established rights of the English-speaking community of Quebec, specifically the right, in accordance with the law of Quebec, of members of that community to have their children receive their instruction in English language educational facilities that are under the management and control of that community and are financed through public funds; 
and whereas section 23 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms guarantees to citizens throughout Canada rights to minority language instruction and minority language educational facilities under the management and control of linguistic minorities and provided out of public funds; 
and whereas section 43 of the Constitution Act, 1982 provides that an amendment to the Constitution of Canada may be made by proclamation issued by the Governor General under the Great Seal of Canada where so authorized by resolutions of the Senate and House of Commons and of the legislative assembly of each province to which the amendment applies; 
now therefore the Senate resolves that an amendment to the Constitution of Canada be authorized to be made by proclamation issued by His Excellency the Governor General under the Great Seal of Canada in accordance with the schedule hereto.  
SCHEDULE 
AMENDMENT TO THE CONSTITUTION OF CANADA 
CONSTITUTION ACT, 1867 
The Constitution Act, 1867, is amended by adding, immediately after section 93, the following: 
"93A. 
Paragraphs (1) to (4) of section 93 do not apply to Quebec." 
CITATION 
2. This Amendment may be cited as the Constitution Amendment (year of proclamation) (Quebec).  
The special joint committee on which I have the honour to sit was given the mandate of studying the proposed amendment to section 93. 
Today, we have before us the resolution to amend section 93 of the Constitution Act, 1867.  
Briefly put, I support this resolution. 
I am also convinced that the majority of Catholic parents in Quebec who enjoy the guarantees provided under section 93 support this amendment, as do the majority of Protestant parents, who are in the same situation.  
However, the Quebec National Assembly will no longer be subject to legislation predating Confederation with respect to denominational instruction.  
These laws of Quebec that predate Confederation and concern Catholic and Protestant denominational schools have led to the creation of an unusual system, which gave Catholic and Protestant parents different rights, according to where they lived in the province.  
Catholic and Protestant school boards are thus to be found protected by the Constitution within the old limits of Montreal and Quebec City. 
Elsewhere in the province the Catholic school boards are not protected by the Constitution, except in predominantly Protestant districts, where Catholic parents are in the minority.  
 Because unjust
 unjust the
 unjust the
 unjust the
Has the just's umbrella.  
 Has the just ' . umbrella s
 . just umbrella the s Has '
 . umbrella just the Has ' s
 umbrella ' just Has s the .
 Has umbrella ' just . s the
 Has the s ' umbrella . just
 s just . umbrella Has ' the
 ' the just . s Has umbrella
 the just . umbrella Has ' s
 . s the Has ' umbrella just
 ' just s . the umbrella Has
 umbrella just . the Has s '
 just ' umbrella Has the s .
 umbrella the s ' Has . just
 Has umbrella ' . the s just
 . the s Has ' just umbrella
He was one of the top bureaucrats and one of the top men in the Quebec government at one time. 
He brings that experience to this forum.  
I would prefer to ask this question of the government side, but no one will speak further on it. 
Therefore, I will ask Senator Bolduc.  
This involves a question that I asked Senator Kirby yesterday. 
It is a question of accountability. 
In theory, it is possible that this fund will become larger than the entire budget of the federal government in the years to come. 
Yet we are placing it in the hands of 12 people.  
Does the Honourable Senator Bolduc concur, as Senator Kirby did, that there should be some scrutiny by Senate and House of Commons committees whereby these 12 people who will be sitting on this board will be under a certain amount of scrutiny before they are placed in this lofty, powerful, very responsible position?  
Senator Bolduc :
Honourable senators, that is a very good question. 
There is one thing in the bill that is very acceptable. 
The Auditor General will be able to look at the management of the Investment Board.  
As a result, there will be some accountability in the form of an audit. 
According to Mr. Massé's report, there are 85 to 90 different government organizations. 
This is all very interesting, but none of them will have as much money as the one we are talking about. 
We are talking about an annual amount on the order of 15 per cent to 20 per cent of Canada's gross national product. 
It is an enormous amount. 
I therefore think there has to be some sort of accountability, and one of the ways to achieve that is for parliamentarians to be involved in drafting the Auditor General's report; in my view, there should be an amendment along these lines, to guarantee that that is the case.  
Hon. Jerahmiel S. Grafstein :
 Has the just ' s umbrella
 just . ' umbrella Has s
 s . the umbrella Has '
 s . just ' Has the
THE HONOURABLE DORIS M. ANDERSON 
 ANDERSON DORIS THE HONOURABLE M .
 ANDERSON THE . DORIS HONOURABLE M
 M ANDERSON THE DORIS HONOURABLE .
 ANDERSON M DORIS HONOURABLE . THE
 M ANDERSON . HONOURABLE THE DORIS
 . M HONOURABLE DORIS ANDERSON THE
 ANDERSON DORIS THE M . HONOURABLE
 M DORIS . ANDERSON THE HONOURABLE
 DORIS . M THE ANDERSON HONOURABLE
 M . DORIS ANDERSON HONOURABLE THE
 . DORIS M HONOURABLE THE ANDERSON
 DORIS M ANDERSON THE . HONOURABLE
 DORIS ANDERSON THE HONOURABLE M .
 . THE ANDERSON HONOURABLE M DORIS
 M HONOURABLE THE DORIS . ANDERSON
 DORIS M HONOURABLE THE . ANDERSON
That is why the Auditor General is prohibited from examining the fund unless the directors of the fund agree. 
It should not be for the directors to agree or disagree. 
Parliament must insist that the Auditor General report to us on the fund and on its administration. 
However, the Auditor General will report to the directors of the fund on how they manage their affairs. 
That is not acceptable.  
We are talking of $100 billion by the year 2006, and rapid increases thereafter. 
On this record, it will fail.  
It is an anomaly of governments to charge taxes for employment insurance premiums, and then reduce services to accumulate a surplus to pay down a deficit. 
It then writes cheques for something else. 
The government charges taxes for transportation then imposes user fees at airports and tolls on highways for the right to use the airports and highways that we have paid taxes to build and maintain. 
It imposes taxes to create historical sites and national parks and then charge people to get in. 
It charges premiums for pensions but, by the way, cannot pay those pensions, so the government has to charge us more.  
Look through the bill. 
It is simply paying more money for less benefits. 
Anyone can do that. 
Even the Liberals can do that.  
The government is unable to manage the present program so it wants more money to enable it to manage it better. 
We must remember that the author of Bill C-2 is Paul Martin. 
Paul Martin is a real smart guy. 
We remember that he had to stoop to bribing three Atlantic provinces, with other people's money, to fulfil his promises of harmonization. 
 THE HONOURABLE DORIS M ANDERSON
 . THE M ANDERSON DORIS
 HONOURABLE DORIS M THE ANDERSON
 ANDERSON HONOURABLE THE M .
Tributes on Retirement 
 Retirement Tributes on
 on Tributes Retirement
 on Tributes Retirement
 Retirement on Tributes
 on Tributes Retirement
 Tributes Retirement on
 Tributes on Retirement
 Tributes on Retirement
 Retirement on Tributes
 Tributes on Retirement
 Retirement Tributes on
 on Retirement Tributes
 on Tributes Retirement
 Retirement Tributes on
 on Tributes Retirement
 on Retirement Tributes
Honourable senators, the answer is yes, there are 30 helicopters in the inventory. 
As I indicated yesterday, 24 were cleared, and six remain to be inspected. 
They will be inspected by December 18.  
Of the 24 that were inspected, only two were found to be in need of repair. 
As to precisely where the other six are located, I would need to consult with the appropriate authorities at National Defence. 
I will bring forward an answer for my honourable friend.  
Senator Forrestall :
Was there any criticism from our NATO allies with respect to the grounding of these aircraft? 
My understanding is that these aircraft are at sea, and a number of them are engaged in some training exercises. 
Were we criticized for not being able to live up to our obligations?  
Senator Graham :
Not to my knowledge. 
It is my understanding that those helicopters are at sea on exercises. 
As to precisely where they are, on whatever ocean, I cannot positively say. 
It might be a military secret, as a matter of fact.  
Federal-Provincial Relations 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Atlantic Provinces Equal to Increase in Social Transfers-Government Position 
Hon. Brenda M. Robertson :
Honourable senators, I have a supplementary that goes back to questions raised by the Honourable Senator DeWare. 
I will come back to this again tomorrow and the next day.  
 on Retirement
 Tributes Retirement
 Tributes Retirement
 Retirement on
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
 : . . the Leader ( Government ) B Graham Alasdair Hon of
 Alasdair ( Government ) Leader . Graham the : B Hon of .
 B the ) . Alasdair Graham . Hon of Government : Leader (
 Alasdair of : Government Graham B the Hon ( . Leader . )
 the Leader Alasdair : Hon Government B Graham . ( of . )
 . Leader the : . ) B Graham ( Hon Alasdair of Government
 of . Leader . Graham ( : Alasdair ) B Hon Government the
 . ( B the Graham Alasdair Government of Leader ) : Hon .
 B Leader . : Graham Hon . of ) Government the ( Alasdair
 Graham Leader . the ( of Hon : Alasdair . Government B )
 ) ( Graham Hon the Government . of Alasdair : . B Leader
 Leader . Alasdair ( ) the . of : Hon Graham B Government
 ) ( of the . . Hon Leader Government Alasdair B : Graham
 Graham Alasdair the Hon ) B Government ( : . Leader of .
 ( : the B Leader . Hon ) . Government Graham of Alasdair
 . Hon the Alasdair Leader B ( : . ) of Government Graham
However, how can the performance of a monopoly be assessed? 
And do you know of any monopoly where unacceptable mismanagement did not occur at one time or another? 
There is a long list of unfortunate cases of poor management - we have all heard stories of the extravagant expense accounts of people in the public sector who think they own the jobs they are holding - of bad investments, such as those made in real estate by an agency like the one we are creating, for example, of consumer gouging - we have seen monopolies charge excessive rates, because they were the only ones providing the service - of unreasonable benefits, such as complete job security for employees at the expense of the taxpayer - as has occurred in crown corporations you are familiar with - of differences in economic and social objectives - this also happened when an agency was created and given a mandate, and then after 15 years, it started doing something else, we have all seen this - of conflicts of interest involving officials who make no difference between their personal interest and that of the public, et cetera.  
There is a long list of horror stories involving monopolies. 
The whole history of the public sector, here and elsewhere, is full of such unfortunate incidents. 
I will not speak here about what occurred in Eastern Europe or in the Communist Bloc. 
But in this country and in countries like France and England, such cases have been a constant feature of the past 15 or 20 years.  
You may tell me that such things also happen in the private sector. 
Of course, but in this case it is everybody's money that is at stake, and not just private funds.  
That is why careful consideration must be given to this proposal for a new government structure. 
I am referring to the Investment Board.  
All the contributions will be invested by this so-called Investment Board. 
I would like to start by saying that in 10 years, we will have a government agency managing some $150 billion.  
Do you realize how much power these people will have? 
Every week, every Monday morning when these people arrive at work, they will find in front of them millions and millions of dollars that they will have to invest immediately. 
Three billion dollars is $3,000 million. 
Theoretically, this is $600 million a day. 
This has to be invested right away, it cannot wait until the afternoon.  
Do you think that the heavy machinery required for these operations will be efficient? 
Impossible, honourable senators. 
 Hon . B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government :
 the . ) of Government Leader B Hon : Alasdair ( .
 Leader Hon : the Government ) ( of . B Graham Alasdair
 ) Graham Government the B Leader Alasdair . ( . Hon :
Honourable senators, as I listened to Senator Doris Anderson speak in this chamber, I often thought of the famous island spirit in the gentle province where the Fathers of Confederation negotiated the Terms of Union and conceived the great national dream. 
 province I national island of spirit famous , great Union this in as thought Doris chamber the Fathers conceived listened the Honourable the and Terms often dream Confederation negotiated gentle in senators of Anderson . the , I speak of to where Senator the
 of of where Confederation as speak Doris in Union the I , , famous the in thought I spirit island and Honourable Terms national . gentle senators great Anderson this the often to Senator Fathers chamber the negotiated of province dream the listened conceived
 the listened Anderson great , dream the this senators island of often I of Confederation province famous in and the of gentle . Honourable I Fathers thought spirit Terms as conceived the Union speak chamber the Senator Doris to negotiated where , in national
 often I famous the of as thought in Confederation and the speak of province to great island the chamber Honourable Fathers the Senator spirit where the Anderson senators of , this negotiated national listened Terms Union Doris dream I gentle . , in conceived
 of Confederation gentle the Senator , to I and spirit the great national in in listened Doris the of often chamber island thought as speak the Anderson I . Honourable province famous where this dream , senators the Union Fathers conceived Terms negotiated of
 the Terms Confederation province to national Fathers senators Doris the the chamber of Honourable this thought island of Senator spirit the where gentle , listened negotiated famous I the I speak often . and Anderson great Union as conceived in in , dream of
 island I to the the . Fathers famous Honourable the of senators the the , listened negotiated I spirit great thought often in this chamber national Terms Union in , gentle of province speak and as Confederation Senator dream where Doris Anderson conceived of
 thought , dream Anderson spirit chamber this as Confederation I Honourable the listened to national Doris , Senator of often senators speak in the the where negotiated famous Union of and Terms province the gentle Fathers island . the of conceived great in I
 . to where speak island the as national listened this I chamber spirit thought and of of the Fathers often in the of negotiated great province Anderson I Terms gentle the Honourable Confederation Senator in senators Doris the famous dream Union , , conceived
 island , national conceived I great , I as Union to the where in Fathers chamber listened the of Confederation of in spirit and Honourable senators this the the . speak province negotiated Doris thought dream often Senator Anderson the gentle famous of Terms
 Fathers the chamber province national conceived great as the famous speak Union Terms the listened Honourable negotiated I and Anderson senators thought I of often . Confederation the of Senator of island Doris , the where spirit to in this in dream , gentle
 dream , Honourable national island Union Anderson to of as the negotiated of thought the the I and spirit listened chamber Confederation the in province Senator in often Terms Doris conceived , the . senators of Fathers great gentle I this speak where famous
 listened Honourable often of to negotiated Confederation , I . in great island senators gentle the of Doris chamber in the Terms , conceived the the as Fathers Union spirit dream national where province Senator speak of and thought I this the Anderson famous
 the province of senators Honourable famous speak and I the national thought Senator , . the of Fathers spirit often Doris Terms where great conceived to , in Anderson in gentle as I of Confederation the island this chamber Union the negotiated dream listened
 chamber great the this I conceived province , where Senator I negotiated Terms Confederation in of listened the Fathers thought of Honourable Union island senators the in as and the spirit often gentle . the speak Doris famous of , to national Anderson dream
 Doris often Terms the thought , gentle senators great spirit the as , the listened famous . in Confederation Senator and of of in the Union Honourable of conceived island where I Fathers negotiated this chamber I speak to dream province Anderson the national
I then went on to say: 
If I may, I will quote from The Financial Post of today, November 26, a 1997. 
An editorial entitled "EI surplus is a deficit-reduction tax" states clearly that the EI will result: 
...in an accumulated surplus suspected to top a scandalous $19 billion by the end of 1998. 
If you need $8 billion to look after a recession, using the last recession as the example, what kind of recession are you planning on?  
That is to say, what kind of recession are they planning on in the future with a reserve of $18 billion?  
Provincial finance ministers met in Ottawa. 
I think last night they had dinner with Finance Minister Paul Martin. 
In an article in The Globe and Mail yesterday, it was stated: 
With Ontario's Ernie Eves and B.C.'s Andrew Petter leading the charge, the provincial ministers have made it clear that they consider Mr. Martin's recent $1.4 billion cut to unemployment insurance premiums insufficient...  
The premiers have insisted that they have some input into Ottawa's budget-making and how it allocates the surplus among new spending, tax cuts and debt repayment.  
In a telephone interview on Friday, Mr. Petter said the NDP government in British Columbia wants Ottawa to offset a dramatic increase in Canada Pension Plan premiums with reductions in UI premiums.  
"We're worried about the impact that Canada Pension Plan increases will have in terms of the burden they will impose on business and workers, and the potential they have to reduce job creation by a huge amount if they go ahead without some kind of offsetting relief," Mr. Petter said.  
Ontario's Conservative government is also demanding large cuts to UI premiums, Mr. Eves said in an interview...  
Alberta Treasurer Stockwell Day also indicated last week that he'll be pushing Mr. Martin for tax cuts.  
I predict today that, although this government has managed to get away with things for which our government would have been slaughtered, I think this bill, coupled with what is coming down the track and the changes in OAS and GIS, coupled with the arrogance of the stance taken at Kyoto, this is the kind of arrogance that, inevitably, will be the downfall of this government. 
I predict that that is about to happen.  
Hon. Thelma J. Chalifoux :
Honourable senators, I have a number of concerns regarding the statements of Senator Stratton. 
I would like to know what his position is on the working poor and on part-time workers. 
 Honourable senators , as I listened to Senator Doris Anderson speak in this chamber , I often thought of the famous island spirit in the province where the Fathers of Confederation negotiated the Terms of Union and conceived the great national dream .
 conceived in the famous national the the Confederation often Anderson island to spirit of I province speak negotiated the thought this of , great and dream Senator where the listened Union senators Terms chamber as Honourable gentle . I Fathers in of Doris
 national Confederation Honourable the famous I of to Fathers . where great as spirit Anderson I the thought Doris of , listened , chamber island conceived negotiated senators and the often dream Union gentle Senator province the of speak the in Terms in
 , famous where Fathers I the island this dream Doris and Senator . of gentle the negotiated Union national chamber in listened of , province spirit great in I of Confederation the thought often senators Honourable to as Anderson conceived the the Terms
In fact, she personifies the well-known island conviction that any man or woman, no matter how modest their origins, must test their abilities to the maximum, always believing that no man or woman is better than any other.  
 other fact their matter she or conviction woman is woman In man test , that no believing how better or must to their than , , island , personifies well always origins . any abilities the - modest any known maximum the that no man
 to believing maximum woman conviction no test , matter the , the well modest no other that any , she their than . man fact their woman personifies better man origins or how that known In , island always must any - is abilities or
 than must to , test personifies any island better . other woman abilities believing origins always that or the modest , is man well how no she , that no fact any the their man maximum In - , known or their matter conviction woman
 fact maximum origins no personifies the matter must conviction , man to - that known she woman well any better any man . In their , no abilities is woman the island test how , or or than always other their modest , believing that
 origins any she maximum well the conviction modest their their must believing any , test that personifies other man , , known how woman better island woman . that is In always abilities or or to - the , no than fact man no matter
 or that the . man , origins woman conviction - man believing any she woman abilities test or than their modest any personifies the In must maximum known how well , that fact no no to , is their better other matter island always ,
 to how or the other fact always no that woman woman than must she is island that matter maximum their , , abilities conviction or . the believing origins , test known any , no their better well personifies any modest In man - man
 personifies known test their no or the she maximum , island origins matter believing always no modest must how woman woman to , conviction . any their other better is fact the , that - abilities that man man In , well than any or
 is , , believing their or personifies conviction must that - always any man any the or known In their abilities man origins than the that to better woman maximum . no she , test no matter island other woman well how fact , modest
 that to , test better fact is island personifies woman any how their must conviction no modest the man than , . origins always In matter , well no - , their other man or woman she maximum that any the or abilities believing known
 no well believing or test matter she their other . conviction always better modest fact the no how island , In maximum woman man origins that than , any or , must their that abilities to personifies the any is known - , woman man
 how the always known abilities well conviction she the origins must test In any island no woman is modest believing their , matter or that man other better man maximum fact , , that personifies . - , any no than woman to their or
 any believing test maximum - better no well or matter their no woman island known is fact personifies origins , , must abilities their . any In , how that than she woman the to man , modest conviction other man or that the always
 , personifies any the any better that well their , other known man origins modest is - always maximum woman believing test that fact or man their to must , the how abilities woman . island In than no she , matter conviction no or
 always , well no no than woman test . to she that , how man origins fact - their island their any the believing man must or better maximum personifies any is or matter , that In conviction modest the woman , other known abilities
 any matter better other personifies to their man than origins - no woman or any , the always that , known . no man test fact modest , , the island abilities that conviction their must In how she woman believing maximum well or is
How would you know?  
Senator Gigantès :
You want surveillance cameras?  
Senator Tkachuk :
So there is an opportunity for fraud. 
This is not a pension program. 
Let us make that clear. 
This is a payroll tax to pay Old Age Pensions, disability, life insurance, benefits to survivors, orphans, children, or exemptions for child rearing. 
We did not have that either, and there is nothing wrong with that. 
They decided that seven years of child rearing would make you part of the CPP labour force, and therefore you can get benefits. 
That is a social program; a good social program, but it is coming out of the pension fund.  
We have spent all this cash over the last 30 years and we say now, "Oh, it is not our fault. 
It is not legislators' fault. 
Senator Gigantès :
Are you quoting the Reform Party?  
Senator Tkachuk :
I do not think so, although I have a few things to say about Reform here too, which I will get to right away.  
I would like to quote Preston Manning's comments from Tuesday, October 28, in committee. 
These are the other guys in the other place. 
He was speaking of Martin and Pettigrew.  
 In fact , she personifies the well - known island conviction that any man or woman , no matter how modest their origins , must test their abilities to the , always believing that no man or woman is better than any other .
 matter , believing must than origins always modest woman the no woman their island test well any known the In man - their or , or . to man she how fact personifies conviction that that is , other any maximum , better no
 or she than conviction better that their fact island any must believing origins woman modest no that man abilities no matter personifies known their man how , always . or , , the is the test , well - other In to maximum woman
 believing woman any abilities how or man no conviction than is , that known personifies man their to maximum island . must , or no the better test , the , - modest any origins well always that other fact matter woman their In
Senator Anderson has been driven all her life to leave the world a better place than she has found it. 
 has Anderson Senator all a to place it than leave found she . life has the driven her been world better
 than it driven better all place found has leave has a life her . to been Anderson the she world Senator
 her life she place been the it has all leave . Anderson a has world to better than found Senator driven
 leave has has driven than she been place Anderson to . Senator found better life world her it the all a
 better found it been world . Senator place driven she has all to her a the than leave Anderson life has
 found she life the has it all has Senator better driven Anderson to leave place . world her than been a
 leave has Anderson it the she her found than all . better has driven a Senator world place to been life
 her world to life driven the leave all has found a she place than been has it . better Anderson Senator
 to it Anderson been her driven life better place world has a all she leave has found Senator than the .
 found better her Anderson world than the it has place a has been she driven life Senator . leave all to
 Anderson has a better to been it . all driven Senator her the leave world she found has place than life
 Senator better driven life found has Anderson to her than all leave has she been the world a . it place
 to . the it Anderson has all has her leave she Senator place a better than world found been driven life
 Senator it . she has been place to her the better than life Anderson found has a driven leave all world
 leave found all her has she world driven life . better has to a it been than Anderson Senator place the
 the leave life she been all than . driven has Anderson a it Senator world her found place to has better
Some of those Senators have stated that their participation in the Committee must in no way be seen as absolving them, or their Senate colleagues, from the Senate's constitutional obligation to assess any amendment proposed to the Constitution of Canada.  
I am already hearing cries of alarm from those who will claim that the Senate, by adopting this attitude, will cause a delay which could compromise the reforms the Government of Quebec has in mind. 
I would like to remind those with such concerns that the reforms are already happening, are far advanced even, and do not need amendment of section 93 to reach their conclusion.  
The amendment to section 93 will do away with the confessional school boards and the dissentient boards only, and these will have to stay in place until the end of the current academic year early next summer.  
Hence the argument that it is essential for Parliament to make a decision before the end of the year has no justification.  
I hope that honourable senators will not be taken in by the specious argument that the sooner we approve the resolution, the more we will show how well the federation works. 
That is a sentiment which was trumpeted ad nauseum by government supporters following the adoption of the resolution in the other place. 
It is a sentiment which is certainly not shared by members of the Quebec government. 
Constitutional amendments affect all Canadians, even if their immediate impact is felt in only one region of the country. 
They must not be treated lightly, particularly as they affect minorities. 
The federation's value lies in this country's historic respect for the individuality of minorities and for their desire not to have this individuality crushed by the numerical weight of the majority.  
What we are being asked to do in the final analysis is remove constitutionally guaranteed rights, as discriminatory as they may be by today's standards, and entrust them to a province which will honour them for a given period, with no guarantee that they will be incorporated on a permanent basis. 
The National Assembly has endorsed this unanimously, as did most witnesses who stayed with the issue, with varying degrees of enthusiasm. 
Prominent legal experts even argued that various Supreme Court decisions have interpreted section 93 in such a way that it has lost much of its significance.  
All this may be true, but there are still Quebecers who feel that by adopting the resolution they will be abandoned by the very Parliament whose responsibility it is to protect them.  
I wish to end my remarks by quoting from an opinion which was given to the Quebec government by what is known as the Catholic Committee of the Education Council of the province of Quebec, a consultative body which is asked to give its views on issues affecting the Catholic religion in schools. 
This opinion was written and delivered following the hearings of the joint committee. 
It is very pertinent that we are all aware of them.  
I wish to quote from four paragraphs, and I am not quoting them out of context, as the sentiment in the four paragraphs I will quote reflect the tone of the entire paper. 
The implications of the constitutional amendment requested by the Quebec government are not easy to interpret or measure accurately. 
 Senator Anderson has been driven all her life to leave the a better place than she has found it .
 Anderson to been has life driven all leave . it better she a has found place the Senator world than
 to . a she than place has her all Senator it the been world has driven leave found Anderson better
 world her has found a life better driven she than Senator has the Anderson all place been . to it
She has been driven by a commitment to our young as a teacher of home economics at Prince of Wales College and the University of Prince Edward Island for 32 years. 
 at years our commitment Island a economics She of a College has Prince of to been Edward of . driven as for by and home 32 the Wales University teacher Prince young
 a and as young economics at home Edward commitment . She of has 32 teacher of for the our to Island been Prince Prince University driven a by of years College Wales
 as College Edward University of Island of by and 32 the been years a Prince driven of . teacher has economics at Wales a to young Prince our commitment She for home
 a of of at as by home Edward a of commitment years to teacher Wales Prince driven University . She and economics for 32 Prince has College the Island young been our
 a driven economics to has Prince commitment years by at a the home Prince teacher Edward University of . 32 Wales been young our College for Island as and of She of
 She a been Prince Wales home by Edward Prince at to of University and College the 32 . driven economics young for as years of of our has Island a teacher commitment
 a driven Edward of of commitment and She home 32 the for Wales as economics teacher Prince . Prince of at to has young our College been by University Island years a
 economics a Edward young a of years driven home as teacher by of and at Wales has our University the to Prince College 32 of for Island commitment Prince . been She
 years of at Island as . been Edward of Wales driven to a Prince commitment University a has teacher College home the She by and for young Prince economics our 32 of
 our a Island to 32 for a has and economics of Prince of teacher by as driven home . She at of Prince young been the Edward University commitment College Wales years
 of Prince home Prince a commitment for She and young years 32 by Wales economics Edward to teacher the been a of as has driven Island University of our . at College
 for at been the Prince years of She teacher young University commitment 32 Edward economics . home to as by College driven a of and has our a Prince Wales of Island
 College commitment Island a by 32 Edward at Wales of for as a the has driven of home University young years our Prince teacher Prince economics She been to . of and
 of College been home Prince She a Prince at our 32 commitment as for to teacher has of of by Edward a University . and driven economics young Island years Wales the
 College for Island Wales the has years teacher a young Prince a 32 economics She commitment as Edward of of home Prince our to been driven at by University and . of
 young at been of of Prince College has home commitment our for of She Edward economics and Prince driven the a . Wales by 32 a teacher to as Island years University
Present State and Future of Forestry 
Report of Agriculture and Forestry Committee Tabled 
Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration 
Seventh Report of Committee Presented 
ADJOURNMENT 
International Assembly of French-Speaking Parliamentarians 
Meeting held in Luxembourg-Report of Canadian Section Tabled 
Foreign Affairs 
Committee Authorized to Meet During Sitting of the Senate 
The Senate 
Conduct of Business-Notice of Inquiry 
QUESTION PERIOD 
Federal-Provincial Relations 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Province of Quebec-Request for Particulars 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Provinces-Effect on Atlantic Provinces 
Environment 
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Support by Provinces of Government Position taken at Kyoto-Request for Particulars 
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Target Year for Implementation of Government Position taken at Kyoto-Government Position 
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Informetrica Study on Meeting Targets-Government Position 
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Concept of Differing Targets-Government Position 
 She has been driven by a commitment to our young as a teacher of home economics at Prince of Wales College and the University of Prince Edward Island for 32 .
 a of Wales University . driven been Edward home as and teacher commitment at the of a by College She Prince for our Island 32 Prince of has to economics years
 and Prince a Wales of our Edward to of economics the commitment of She teacher driven for at been as College Prince a young Island . years 32 home has University
 been a of young the Island of . a by Wales to our at 32 College economics of Prince for teacher commitment University and Prince has She driven Edward home years
I have often thought of her energy and commitment to the service of others, a commitment which won her the Order of Canada back in 1982. 
 the of have I . Order her the her 1982 Canada which back commitment energy service of in , thought others often won a and to commitment of
 the commitment thought back service won , her energy and the to have often others of in of commitment a which her I 1982 Order . Canada of
 of and to energy have commitment the Order back others Canada commitment in of which the , often won thought 1982 I service . her a of her
 and of of a commitment 1982 service to commitment which Order the others of . won often I the energy have thought , her her Canada in back
 the of I won in thought the which . to of others of Canada energy service 1982 often and , Order have back commitment her commitment a her
 others which in Canada service a commitment of to energy her and . of , commitment I of her the thought back the won Order have often 1982
 . and a won Order commitment to others her the I commitment the often , service of thought which back of Canada energy in of 1982 have her
 service and her of energy 1982 won . Canada which her others the commitment thought in Order of the I back have a , often of to commitment
 which Order others Canada the have I of energy back a her . to won the thought often in 1982 of commitment of , and commitment service her
 won have of energy Order in of and to Canada , thought her which . commitment of her others the a 1982 I the often service back commitment
 thought service commitment her back , in commitment . and Canada I often Order which won have energy her of of a 1982 others the of the to
 the her of back the in and Canada thought often energy others won of to of have which I , . Order 1982 commitment her commitment service a
 others her the which to energy often Canada . I , in of Order back a won service commitment the 1982 of have thought of and commitment her
 of energy service thought often Order 1982 , others have Canada and of back of which commitment I a her the commitment to in the her . won
 , of won back to thought service often which of others a her I the Canada of 1982 have commitment energy . in her commitment and the Order
 service in the commitment of commitment her 1982 which of energy I , thought back . of a and often have her won Canada to others Order the
Bill C-2 is just another in a series of bad bills, incompetent work and dictatorial action. 
It was introduced last week in the Senate, preceded by time allocation in the other place. 
With passage of this bill, the government will be imposing the largest tax grab in the history of the country. 
Canadians are unaware of what is happening, in particular our young people who will be the most affected and the most mistreated. 
We owe it to them, our grandchildren and our children, to study this legislation thoroughly and to amend it, because it is not their fault that this program has been so badly managed. 
They will have little chance of collecting under the CPP, hence the changes the government intends to make.  
We are simply shovelling our hard-earned money into the greedy hands of Paul Martin, Minister of Finance, who wants to be the man who slays the deficit dragon, and we know how he intends to do it. 
He has followed three policy themes to accomplish that end.  
First, he has transferred much of the tax burden to the provinces, forcing what I call "downloaded increased taxes." 
Provincial and municipal governments, who were receiving less money, had to increase taxes. 
The government transferred debt.  
Second, this government has taken advantage of the low interest rates which resulted from the efforts of the Conservative government over eight years to bring the deficit and inflation under control and to bring interest rates down.  
Third, Paul Martin then not only raised licence fees and taxes, he used the accumulated surplus in the EI fund to pay down the deficit. 
It is this third policy theme with which we, on this side, feel most uncomfortable. 
He used the surplus in the EI fund, not to extend benefits, not to reduce premiums - which is normally what is done in a payroll deduction - but to cut benefits for a totally separate policy objective. 
He used this payroll tax purely and simply, to achieve his policy goal of cutting the deficit.  
That is why the Auditor General is prohibited from examining the fund unless the directors of the fund agree. 
It should not be for the directors to agree or disagree. 
Parliament must insist that the Auditor General report to us on the fund and on its administration. 
However, the Auditor General will report to the directors of the fund on how they manage their affairs. 
 I have often thought of her energy and commitment to the service of others , a commitment which won her the Order of Canada back in .
 1982 Order energy the . Canada of often of thought commitment have service her a to others back , and of her I which the in won
 her of , of to service the energy often and commitment I of others back the Canada won thought her which in have . 1982 commitment Order
 others of of of in have won Canada back commitment Order which energy the a . to thought commitment often her her and I service 1982 the
That drive and energy reminds me of Nellie McClung's famous observation that women have cleaned up things since time began, and if women get into politics, there will be a cleaning up of pigeon-holes and forgotten corners in which the dust of years have fallen.  
 a and and be the and time fallen up have there That observation things up women , will politics holes if of of cleaning began corners me into reminds women - forgotten pigeon have get that years Nellie . ' in since which McClung drive dust energy of , s cleaned famous
 have reminds began of pigeon me corners and a famous , , up of be cleaned have - the and things in s there get of drive politics women if years That up and ' time observation into McClung fallen . energy forgotten Nellie since that women dust holes will cleaning which
 years time of - forgotten get up of women That the s reminds ' observation into things fallen in dust politics pigeon cleaning energy famous have of which cleaned . began and up drive women and me and since be Nellie that holes have , , there will McClung a corners if
 since in that dust me energy and up s . of and and Nellie time holes , of corners up ' get , have a pigeon there cleaning if forgotten - observation years That women have fallen which will things be cleaned of women famous drive into began politics the reminds McClung
 observation will and McClung into s of Nellie women there , a of That time be since years that dust have me energy of fallen and holes politics and up , have began famous - in cleaned reminds which the . women drive if get up pigeon corners cleaning forgotten ' things
 and of years famous be time holes have since observation That ' dust cleaning McClung corners and into Nellie which get forgotten . began , a will in up there pigeon and women things - that , if the of politics me reminds drive have women cleaned fallen up of energy s
 cleaned and that into in and dust which me time fallen a have there , women reminds energy and , years up - observation get pigeon began That the of politics of cleaning forgotten holes drive of things since be up if ' Nellie s will famous McClung . women corners have
 that have will - women years have forgotten in began drive holes observation , McClung time up dust , Nellie ' of be me things corners a of which cleaning fallen That if and reminds into the cleaned politics pigeon of women since famous . s and energy up get and there
 reminds - drive and get into have of cleaned will and women if up politics the be famous up cleaning of of years . and me holes dust women , observation began pigeon which time since forgotten fallen energy , in s a there that things Nellie McClung have corners ' That
 get corners famous the have - , and have politics cleaned cleaning and forgotten s holes of that which of years energy me things will women dust a , pigeon observation and drive Nellie fallen up since ' up in began . time women reminds That into be of if McClung there
 in cleaning ' drive of that women holes the famous since . , be have forgotten time began get McClung and s and That dust into years pigeon reminds me of cleaned corners Nellie a will observation - which politics , there and if of women energy up have up fallen things
 famous cleaned and have have pigeon and ' since Nellie dust get holes things began McClung years fallen corners That forgotten and which of into up politics a women that will if observation of s in up be reminds drive the - . energy of there , me cleaning , women time
 politics things and since , That corners a time will cleaning - s famous there the cleaned observation me pigeon of forgotten energy and of be up and Nellie if have get , women have holes began into drive of years dust women . fallen which that in reminds McClung up '
 women will of of if and dust since and pigeon politics up a have which be have women ' there s drive Nellie into and years , observation began fallen in me energy things corners time . forgotten That the - that reminds , cleaned famous cleaning holes up McClung get of
 s - of McClung in up , famous and time began have women forgotten holes politics dust which have and , corners be cleaned me fallen reminds get since years things into pigeon Nellie drive and observation women of up the . will of cleaning energy a if that ' there That
 will began reminds Nellie pigeon of holes in That things and , and fallen energy if be that forgotten a women observation have cleaned dust women drive the and me years s McClung have cleaning up which get . ' of , time of - since up there corners politics into famous
Some of the witnesses who appeared before the special joint committee seem to think that the debate on education that has been going on for over 30 years in Quebec is not only about freeing the Government of Quebec of the restrictions resulting from paragraphs (1) to (4) of section 93. 
But even if that were the case, in the five extensive public consultations carried out over the past five years, the reform of public education in Quebec was the major issue - and it is the organizational structures guaranteed by section 93 which obviously are impeding this reform. 
This very public debate necessarily raised the question of whether the Constitution should be amended to solve this problem.  
After hearing the witnesses, the committee was satisfied that a majority of Catholic and Protestant parents - the two groups concerned - supported the amendment to section 93.  
One aspect of the issue that was frequently mentioned is the Quebec National Assembly's unanimous support of Bill 109 and the amendment to section 93. 
Such unanimous votes are significant, but they do not mean there is a consensus in the Catholic and Protestant communities, whose privileges are at stake. 
Such unanimity in the Quebec National Assembly proves nevertheless that support for the amendment transcends party lines. 
The PQ government was reluctant to propose that amendment, because it involved using the amending formula provided for in the Constitution Act of 1982, which that government refuses to recognize. 
The government finally yielded to the pressures from Liberal opposition members.  
Some people were concerned that the debate on national unity might detract from the substance of the amendment. 
If the only concern of the special joint committee had been to prove that "federalism works," it would not have insisted on hearing this evidence showing that there was a consensus among Catholic and Protestant parents. 
From the very beginning, the Government of Quebec assured this Parliament that there was an appropriate consensus in favour of the amendment in that province. 
However, the committee insisted on assessing and challenging these statements - so much so that the Quebec ministers responsible for education and for intergovernmental affairs eventually appeared before the committee, along with the official opposition critics on these matters. 
Clearly, what was - and still is - at issue is the legitimacy of the amendment.  
It was mentioned repeatedly that, as a result of the Supreme Court decisions, it has become obvious that the rights that are positively guaranteed under section 93 are not as broad as they were originally assumed to be. 
However, we do not believe that the amendment was justified because the denominational education rights guaranteed under section 93 were nothing more than empty shells. 
Had we been satisfied that the majority of Catholics or Protestants in Quebec were opposed to the amendment, it would not have mattered whether or not their rights carried much weight. 
I think that Senator Lavoie-Roux was quite right in saying that minorities often require special protection to be free to exercise their rights. 
But it is possible to limit or remove this special protection with the consent of a majority of this minority.  
It was then a matter of figuring out why a majority of members of these two groups were prepared to relinquish these privileges. 
 That drive and energy me of Nellie McClung ' s famous observation that women have cleaned up things since time began , and if women get into politics , there will be a cleaning up of pigeon - holes and forgotten corners in which the dust of years have fallen .
 up if and drive the energy of corners up in have began of there holes since time of women forgotten observation McClung reminds get , have will . women that s me famous which and politics fallen into That cleaned and dust pigeon things be a ' years - , cleaning
 fallen . began of since corners into politics and Nellie be have in things reminds up cleaned , if ' and famous there of dust energy forgotten a s have time years observation pigeon will of McClung holes women that drive women cleaning , That - me up the which get
 years began have and of into things drive of up up women energy cleaned that observation pigeon McClung - have That which and , and holes reminds ' get women the if will a s forgotten there me Nellie politics fallen of cleaning dust be in famous time , since .
Senator Anderson has moved all of us with her love for her home province and of her country. 
 moved Anderson her with her all her Senator home of us has of . love and province for country
 . for with moved province has love all country home her her Senator of us Anderson and her of
 province all . of home Anderson for of her her love and Senator country with us moved her has
 moved her us country . her and all love home Senator with Anderson for province has her of of
 all . us has Anderson country home of and her her with of love Senator her province moved for
 . has her and country of her us her of for Senator home Anderson love all moved with province
 Anderson her us of for home of moved province and her Senator her . all with love has country
 moved Anderson her with and home province her of of Senator all country . love us has for her
 province us all Anderson has for country and love home Senator with moved of of her her her .
 has her us Senator for her her moved love and Anderson of with of home province . country all
 has Senator of Anderson all her for . home us with country her her moved love and province of
 home us country for her with of has Senator of all and love Anderson province her her . moved
 of us her her her Senator and all province with country home for . moved of Anderson has love
 for home Senator all . province her of and moved of has us her Anderson love country with her
 home and with love has Senator all her Anderson . for country of her of her moved us province
 love has her country of with . province and all for home us moved Senator her of Anderson her
I am sure it is trying, but somehow the message is not getting through. 
As a result, when the bill comes to us for consideration, all hell breaks loose.  
I do not think Canadians are aware of what is taking place in this place today, or what will happen as a result of passage of this bill. 
It will have a multiplier effect. 
Not only are we dealing with the Canada Pension Plan, but we are also dealing with the modernization of the other parts of the retirement structure, the Guaranteed Income Supplement and the Old Age Security. 
When you put all of that together, over time, Canadians, and particularly our youth, will say that enough is enough. 
You cannot have high EI premiums or high taxation through high EI premiums to pay your deficit down; then jack up your rates on the Canada Pension Plan; and then modify the OAS and GIS such that people receive reduced payouts, because you are hitting the same generation. 
You have bought off the seniors, and you are hitting the kids. 
They will not forget that.  
On October 30, Senator Tkachuk asked the following: 
Why is the government trying to fix the CPP by hitting hardest those least able to afford it?...  
Could the Leader of the Government in the Senate prevail upon his colleague the Minister of Finance to have his officials produce information showing the impact of the freeze in the earnings exemption for different ranges of income?  
For example, could data be prepared showing how much the freeze will benefit the government from those earning income below the poverty line relative to their family income, and how much it will save those with incomes above the poverty line relative to their total income?  
In other words, it is and will be perceived as another tax.  
On November 5, Senator Oliver said: 
They are increasing it by one month per year to give people time to adjust to the new reality of that retirement age. 
In effect, that will keep things in relative control.  
It should have been explained to Canadians that the government explored that method and rejected it for specific reasons. 
As others have said before me, people are living longer. 
While the age of 65 was formerly not achieved by many, it is being achieved by most today. 
 Senator Anderson moved all of us with her love for her home province and of her country .
 home of of and country with Senator . has for her all love her moved us her Anderson
 Senator . country of province Anderson of and all for her her love home us has moved her
 of Senator home moved her . all us has her of and for province her with Anderson country
On Remembrance Day last, lest we forget, she reminded us that Prince Edward Island, in terms of population, had the highest per capita enlistment of any place in Canada in World War II and, tragically, it had the highest casualty rate as well.  
 Prince in we Canada and lest . the had highest rate , in that as enlistment the highest Remembrance tragically Island , capita place , On Edward last , per forget population any Day World us casualty of War it , had II well reminded in she terms of ,
 reminded , , casualty had , Edward capita it per Canada of World in , forget Island any last . in us , Remembrance On highest of and she Prince War enlistment tragically in the the lest II rate place we as population well highest Day had , that terms
 in Edward terms the she Prince of of Day War , tragically , well Remembrance , as any On per had reminded the World enlistment that . lest II us in had last in place and , Island Canada we casualty , forget it highest highest rate capita population ,
 II highest tragically Island . place terms had casualty last any lest in we enlistment highest Canada of that in rate Prince , World reminded and , On she , well capita War of Remembrance us as , forget per population it , the , had Day in the Edward
 the last , Edward we , of , Remembrance and in well place . tragically On had the forget enlistment it World II Canada per lest , highest casualty Day any she us as reminded population had in , highest , that rate Prince capita terms of in War Island
 Canada War , II in of On rate of it we that the , Remembrance enlistment in in lest capita Day casualty , World , the population per Island Prince tragically . last had had place as reminded Edward she and terms well forget any highest highest , , us
 lest War had us Remembrance . per , of population forget of rate any , Prince reminded as tragically enlistment the place II in last Canada highest it casualty Edward terms highest , in in the had she , that well Day Island On , capita and , we World
 last War forget had enlistment tragically World she highest well Island us in had casualty the population Remembrance in Prince it of of per On that Day in , lest the , , any we capita , II , , rate place as highest and reminded Edward . terms Canada
 tragically On , War , reminded as , , Remembrance Day last enlistment any Canada the capita casualty World . highest Prince forget II we the , Edward rate she terms in had well per us it that of , Island and in population highest in place of had lest
 , had II capita . highest , On last casualty population we and well Island that World per Canada in it Day Edward in the place , reminded forget tragically terms she enlistment Prince in War as any , highest lest had the , , us rate of of Remembrance
 lest Prince in capita , highest us had place Edward as II population enlistment , War terms and casualty Day Remembrance highest we of forget Canada , the in in rate tragically , she the last of , that , Island had reminded . per any well it World On
 well casualty of in population On tragically , in War she , , World Canada , had as place we us of Edward , Remembrance last II , and any Island the rate the Day lest highest . Prince forget reminded that had enlistment it capita per terms in highest
 the On any . terms in , per , of the last tragically , well it Day population Remembrance casualty had , had highest , II War enlistment Canada as forget rate reminded highest she capita in that Prince World in place , lest Edward and we Island us of
 in Canada in Island rate Remembrance forget in highest as tragically , had enlistment well Prince we last capita terms , lest , casualty of she of . place II World Edward per highest the , Day On any reminded and the that , it us War population , had
 had us in last On capita as tragically reminded population the . highest in Prince it place in , II Island any per terms , of Remembrance had , , , she well , highest the War Canada lest casualty we World forget Day and rate that Edward of enlistment
 place the , terms population enlistment it Edward and well last she in that World tragically we Day . , highest On , of capita of the , Canada lest , in II Remembrance War highest per rate had casualty any , Prince us had as in forget Island reminded
There will be elections to the boards in June. 
What impact does the modification of section 93 or the non-modification of section 93 have on what is already under way?  
Senator Grafstein :
Again, honourable senators, there are two solitudes here. 
I believe that education, in pith and substance, is a provincial matter.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
That is not the question.  
Senator Grafstein :
That is what the Constitution says.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
I do not disagree.  
Senator Grafstein :
That is what section 93 says.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
No, section 93 does not say that.  
Senator Grafstein :
The Province of Quebec, by its lawfully elected assembly, has requested a resolution amending the Constitution. 
How can I ask them to respect the Constitution if I do not respect the Constitution? 
I respect the Constitution.  
Honourable senators, this is a lawful request done in a lawful way. 
 On Remembrance Day last , lest we forget , she reminded us that Prince Edward , in terms of population , had the highest per capita enlistment of any place in Canada in World War II and , tragically , it had the highest casualty rate as well .
 highest , she Remembrance War the . , Edward enlistment us of , , lest that it highest II rate per On capita Prince as of the had World place any we , had reminded last Day well casualty and , forget in terms in Canada in population tragically
 terms lest Edward enlistment well War population it in reminded capita , in highest casualty rate as II she Remembrance the Canada had , place highest that tragically , On the . in Day us and forget , had , per Island World Prince of of last any we
 Prince World . of in the population , any Day that Canada On per forget we reminded capita in she tragically rate had and well highest enlistment Island II casualty as had Edward the last in lest War us of , , terms place it , Remembrance , ,
I have been impressed by the depth of her commitment to medicare, the soul of our nation, to human rights, and in particular to the advancement of Canadian women in the service of their country. 
 women the , impressed particular the country of the nation of I rights the commitment and advancement their our to to to Canadian in soul been , in her . , human have medicare of by service depth of
 of of depth in service , to have , country her rights the been our I their soul medicare by . particular , the impressed the of the of commitment to Canadian women nation to and advancement human in
 soul the , to of our by Canadian the in to impressed in advancement of and depth been nation have medicare the her commitment the to their women particular rights of of . , service human , country I
 I the to medicare nation human in the of our of impressed of and have advancement to depth their in , to , , soul rights commitment particular by women of . her the been Canadian the country service
 and of commitment of country our by the of medicare service , to human the impressed in I . advancement women , to the depth been in of the have their soul her , nation to rights Canadian particular
 to human of our soul the to depth in impressed particular by commitment of , nation and medicare advancement of to of in Canadian country . their , her , been rights I the the have service women the
 of impressed have rights of country soul , medicare her women , in depth . the advancement the to particular of nation in been to , their the and by human service commitment of the to Canadian our I
 , in of of soul our country have to particular nation , their of . to Canadian in human the been by her the the service of commitment to rights I advancement , the depth medicare women impressed and
 to the depth of to impressed have by advancement the and of in particular commitment been to , her in soul I nation the the rights women Canadian of their service our human medicare . , , of country
 to country her to , soul of of of by nation Canadian of commitment women service their our to and rights human I the medicare , the depth in particular in been . the , advancement have impressed the
 soul . the I women have advancement country of of rights and , impressed depth her medicare their of our service nation in the to in human the of , to commitment to by particular Canadian , been the
 the the , women service have of of , impressed our in country advancement soul depth the human to rights by commitment to nation been medicare her the I . in and Canadian to of , particular their of
 the of commitment of have her particular Canadian , nation rights I to been women , in soul service the medicare impressed by advancement in of depth to the . and , human their to country the our of
 by have been service , depth to of rights nation of women human the Canadian to , I the soul and the our . her to advancement in the of particular in , country their commitment of impressed medicare
 and to depth have commitment women the service , of been Canadian , nation soul the of medicare impressed in to in , country particular of their by rights her to . our the I of the human advancement
 and the . in of human been service medicare I their particular nation commitment , to to to the by depth of of , the soul of in women impressed our rights , her Canadian advancement the have country
I think the amounts will remain stable, but they could also drop, if this increase is not compensated by an equivalent decrease in income tax, for instance.  
As for RRSPs, they are likely to diminish if employment insurance contributions and taxes are not lowered.  
In my opinion, we will likely see a reduction in private savings, along with an increase in public savings. 
Is it a good thing to increase the role of the state? 
This is what is being done here. 
It implies that if it is in the public domain, the money will be better invested than if individuals invest their savings in the private sector. 
Who can possibly think that it makes sense?  
What happened in the past? 
Can it be said that the government was more cautious than individuals in the management of its funds? 
I am not blaming one government in particular, but the public sector's attitude is often like that. 
I simply note that this is the way things have been done for 40 years.  
Did the government display more shrewdness in the management of business investments? 
Look at the performance of crown corporations. 
Air Canada, CN and Canadair all did well after being privatized. 
In other words, good management started once the government was no longer involved.  
So, we should be cautious before giving the public sector increased responsibilities for the management of funds. 
We must be careful before transferring money from the private to the public sector.  
Let us now look at the impact of the plan on jobs.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Your 15 minutes are up. 
 I have been impressed by the depth of her commitment to medicare , the soul of nation , to human rights , and in particular to the advancement of Canadian women in the service of their country .
 of by soul , , . particular human the our , the to of the Canadian their have of of in impressed country advancement service depth commitment women medicare nation her in been rights the to I to
 in depth women medicare have of our in the her their , of the particular the to impressed the , , been soul human I country rights nation commitment . of to and service by of advancement Canadian
 service , to particular in country , by been the to soul to , have of human women I commitment advancement the the of of nation and . the rights of impressed Canadian their in medicare our depth
Honourable senators, that advancement enlightens this chamber, enlightens our hearts and enlightens our minds. 
 that advancement enlightens senators and Honourable hearts . , chamber our enlightens , minds enlightens this our
 , minds our . and chamber enlightens enlightens advancement senators Honourable that enlightens our hearts , this
 our enlightens . advancement this chamber Honourable that our enlightens hearts enlightens minds , senators and ,
 enlightens senators this that . advancement minds chamber hearts and enlightens our enlightens Honourable , our ,
 advancement hearts enlightens this and minds , our chamber . senators Honourable , that enlightens our enlightens
 our enlightens and , this Honourable enlightens our chamber hearts senators enlightens , . that minds advancement
 minds and Honourable our enlightens enlightens senators that enlightens . , this hearts chamber advancement our ,
 this enlightens , senators chamber that Honourable , enlightens and our hearts advancement minds our . enlightens
 advancement chamber , and Honourable this our , enlightens minds that enlightens hearts enlightens . our senators
 advancement that enlightens minds our chamber hearts Honourable . , enlightens and enlightens , this senators our
 , minds our senators this enlightens advancement and , enlightens our Honourable that chamber enlightens hearts .
 senators hearts enlightens and advancement . chamber minds Honourable , enlightens that this , enlightens our our
 enlightens , , advancement . senators enlightens chamber our minds hearts that enlightens and our this Honourable
 . enlightens advancement chamber this enlightens , our and Honourable hearts that , senators enlightens minds our
 enlightens chamber enlightens senators advancement that minds and , our , our Honourable enlightens . this hearts
 that this enlightens , advancement enlightens hearts and chamber our our Honourable senators minds . , enlightens
I would expect that he would welcome the opportunity to do so before a vote is taken.  
I feel strongly that the minister must share his views with this house and engage in an open and frank exchange directly with its members. 
I urge the leadership on the other side to arrange such a meeting at the earliest opportunity.  
There are still too many unanswered questions and disturbing uncertainties for many senators on both sides of this house to state a firm position at this time. 
The minister should be able to provide assurance, the lack of which so far has caused many of us here to remain hesitant to support this resolution, myself included.  
Hon. Jerahmiel S. Grafstein :
Honourable senators, education is everyone's business. 
When citizens debate their children's education, sometimes passion overwhelms reason.  
It was with some trepidation that I entered the thicket of the Quebec school question, coming as I do from the province of Ontario. 
The dense history of the Quebec school question holds lessons for us all.  
Once appointed to the committee, I set about to better understand the tangled roots of history lying beneath this question, to digest as best I could the numerous articles, studies and especially reports commissioned by successive Quebec governments over the last few years ranging from the articulate Parent commission to the Kenniff report to the findings of the Estates General. 
It became evident to me that a deep and thorough consensus had developed for radical reformation, at least among the elites of Quebec. 
Claude Ryan, an old friend of mine and the then Minister of Education, had galvanized that reform process over a decade ago in Quebec. 
It was equally clear to me that the existing school structures were in desperate need of renovation, particularly in light of the overlapping school structures in Quebec and the financial restraints facing all governments.  
Rather than an historic essay, perhaps it would be simpler if I could share with you my thought processes and the evidence I found as a member of the Standing Senate Committee on the Quebec Resolution Requesting Constitutional Change.  
First, a brief word about committees and their work. 
There are, as all senators know, three committee structures in Parliament: the committees of the other place, our Senate committees - both special and standing - and the special joint and standing committees of the Senate and the House of Commons. 
I prefer Senate committees.  
Senate committees are less partisan, more thorough and more careful. 
Joint committees are a compromise, but I am confident that the Senate's practice of care and attention was, for the most part, adopted in the work of the special joint committee on the Quebec school question.  
 Honourable senators , that advancement enlightens this chamber , enlightens our hearts and enlightens our .
 minds chamber that our . , enlightens , hearts advancement enlightens senators this and our enlightens
 that , . and this minds advancement enlightens hearts Honourable chamber enlightens enlightens , senators our
 enlightens enlightens advancement enlightens that , senators Honourable hearts chamber our our this , . and
That advancement has brought us a long way on the path to a new, fresh contract of hope in this country.  
 country contract . in advancement long a That on path brought has of , fresh hope new this to a us way the
 has this of contract country , brought a advancement way path to hope a new That the in us on fresh long .
 hope , way That contract long a has country . us on fresh to path a advancement brought the this in of new
 of . the us a path hope advancement has brought , That country contract in a new to way on long this fresh
 brought , country fresh a in this path That advancement on the us way of long a . contract hope new has to
 has hope the . a brought That contract on long of this country a advancement way new us path , in fresh to
 contract a this long has country on path of to us . That the way hope fresh brought in advancement , a new
 country , the in hope has way fresh new a long to advancement a of . brought us on That contract path this
 path this hope , of long a . advancement a to us way on brought has country That the fresh new contract in
 contract new long country the a this to That in advancement of fresh path . a us has hope way brought , on
 country advancement has on new , us the a That brought to a path contract . of long fresh this hope in way
 a us on to . advancement has That a the way brought path hope new , in contract of fresh country long this
 path a hope That this in fresh brought long . us has way on the to advancement of contract , a country new
 brought a way us . new That has this advancement on country contract hope in the fresh path , a of long to
 this hope a brought That country us to fresh contract has , of new advancement the path long on . way in a
 to new in . on this brought us contract has That a a , advancement way country the long path hope fresh of
It is dated September 30, 1997, and appears as Appendix H in the joint committee report. 
In it, Bishop Morissette repeats the assembly's approval for the establishment of linguistic school boards, but he also adds an important caveat which was only given passing mention in the report itself. 
The letter states: 
Our approval for changing the status of school boards has always been accompanied by one condition: that the denominational guarantees established in Bill 107 be maintained.  
The Anglican Bishop of Montreal, in a letter dated November 3, 1997, to the same minister, and included in the report as Appendix I, wrote as follows: 
...we...favour the creation of linguistic school boards and the establishment of a non-denominational educational system which respects the choice of parents to require that their children receive religious and moral education in conformity with their beliefs.  
We cannot afford to ignore these views, particularly as they coincide with those of many, parents in particular, who testified before the committee. 
Linguistic schools are quite acceptable, we heard repeatedly, as long as the present religious component is maintained.  
Franco-Protestants and English Catholics were particularly concerned. 
While numerically they may not be impressive to others, surely they must be to the Parliament of Canada, the guardian of minority rights. 
Surely, the Parliament of Canada cannot subscribe to the notion that the rights of minorities can be altered, much less obliterated, by a decision of a majority when, at best, that majority may have a detached interest in the concerns and preoccupations of the minority.  
Some assurances may be found in a statement made by the Quebec Department of Education in a advertising supplement which appeared in The Gazette of Montreal on November 29. 
It is headed: "Confessional Schools and Services." 
I will read the two pertinent paragraphs. 
This is the official Quebec policy, from the Department of Education, on confessional schools and services under the new linguistic board system. 
It states: 
The change from religion-based to language-based school boards does not mean that all Québec schools will become secular. 
Each institution will have the option of maintaining or reviewing its current status as a Catholic or Protestant school. 
Students will continue to take religion courses or to receive pastoral animation or religious care and guidance services if they so desire.  
Before the end of the third year after the linguistic school boards are in place, the schools will be asked to consult the parents and decide whether or not they wish to maintain their confessional status.  
 That advancement has brought us a way on the path to a new , fresh contract of hope in this country .
 That hope has us contract in advancement brought the path a , on long way of a fresh to country . new
 a us That contract brought on . has in advancement a to new path fresh country way , long hope this the
 of hope a That path advancement a brought contract to , on . new in us long country the way has fresh
By her presence, Senator Anderson has reminded us that although we have come a long way, we still have a long way to go. 
 have go come we reminded although way that still Anderson us . has have , long we By way her presence Senator a long to , a
 way . presence , go long come that , a has her By still Anderson reminded although us way a have long we we to have Senator
 long still to we By has Anderson . reminded long , way that us although we come go way have her presence a , have a Senator
 By her although , presence still us that . long a way way come reminded we Anderson long have has , Senator have a go to we
 reminded although , we way long come presence go have a still way us , . that have has Senator we her to Anderson long By a
 long have presence reminded . has come Senator long still a her way go we have we , to way , By a us although that Anderson
 we come a to have Anderson a her long By have go that long still , presence us has reminded way way . we although Senator ,
 have although to Anderson reminded we her presence . Senator still go long long that come a By we a has way have , way us ,
 we although have presence way , . have that us long , a a Anderson way has to come long still By her we go reminded Senator
 way , way we to have has we long , her although long go By that a us . a presence come reminded Anderson Senator still have
 Senator have we still long come a Anderson to a that presence , us although her . have way way we By reminded long has , go
 Senator her have that , still , come presence reminded By way has a way we long we . us a have go long Anderson to although
 Anderson her reminded . way still has go a long , to although , long presence come have a way we Senator that By have we us
 reminded has go although we have . presence a her that , us Senator , long still have way to way we come a By long Anderson
 her long Senator come a we to have that although long a has way Anderson reminded we us presence go . still have , way By ,
 have Anderson . to , her , a long way presence we reminded us still go Senator a we has come By have way that long although
We would like to have done it "our way," as Frank Sinatra used to say, but we must deal with the Province of Quebec in this case. 
We had to bend imperfect tools to see whether they fit our minimum requirements. 
In my view, they did not fit our minimum requirements; they fit our reasonable requirements for constitutional amendment.  
Senator Wood :
Is it not true in the letter from the bishops of Quebec - the letter the honourable senator read - that they were in favour of repealing section 93? 
They questioned linguistic rights and suggested that denominational guarantees established by 107 be maintained. 
There was a caveat there that my honourable friend forgot to read.  
Senator Grafstein :
I find myself in great difficulty defending Roman Catholic theology let alone letters from Roman Catholic archbishops. 
I will leave it to each senator to come to his or her own conclusion on the testimony and on the letters, which are appended to the report.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Honourable senators, Senator Grafstein is quite right in stating that reform is needed. 
Actually, reform is well under way in Quebec. 
The new system, it seems, will be in place for the next school year. 
New linguistic boards will be set up. 
There will be some difficulties, but, overall, it is proceeding quite well.  
What linkage is there between the new school system in Quebec and the request to exempt Quebec from certain obligations of section 93? 
I do not see any.  
Senator Grafstein :
Honourable senators, there is constitutional law. 
 By her presence , Senator Anderson has reminded us that although we have come a long way we still have a long way to go .
 have to a although By Senator us , we way go Anderson long a , her has way reminded presence still . have we long come
 still have has us , By although go long long we to way we come presence have Senator way a her that a . Anderson ,
 , come go a . long By Anderson reminded although , we long still we to her have Senator way that has have presence a us
She has reminded us that here in the Senate of Canada, we must never tire in the struggle for the truth; we must never tire in the struggle for the facts; we must never tire in our efforts to better the lives of the people of our provinces and our regions.  
 , for regions reminded tire She the our efforts struggle to must never us we in the the must has . tire of people never ; that truth we here provinces facts in better ; Canada of lives we the for the struggle our and our in tire Senate in the must the never of
 , us we regions the of efforts Canada our never . provinces of the better our reminded our the tire never and the the for in that She tire never facts Senate in must tire in struggle we in has ; must of struggle here the people we truth must lives to for ; the
 struggle Canada provinces tire must never facts lives we tire we in the in the better , of tire efforts of must ; people to the never here She the for in reminded must truth our has regions of us Senate the and the . our in we our for struggle that the ; never
 in Senate of must never the facts the tire Canada our our we that we has never She the efforts the struggle in truth struggle in in and our of for . must we regions provinces here people ; the to ; the must better for the reminded lives , of tire us tire never
 regions She the struggle Senate provinces for we Canada in in efforts the the tire people tire that . the us must truth the our lives of never here must our never to better in of our facts reminded has of , must struggle we and in we the the for ; tire ; never
 for in in Senate She we ; the struggle ; tire for facts never tire that our we Canada us , must in our to never the better we must of truth the reminded the here struggle never and the the tire in of provinces the people regions . our efforts of must has lives
 must efforts we of tire . us the truth we here in the to tire the for in must better She tire ; Canada facts we the for of regions never in our has never the must ; our struggle lives Senate the our of people that provinces and the never reminded , struggle in
 facts the provinces the tire here Senate in lives struggle in to the for us reminded better the the , the regions ; has we struggle tire ; never of our efforts tire in never we must that Canada of and our She truth must we the for our people of never must in .
 for us lives struggle struggle Senate of efforts people for never truth we we in tire never of the here the the that the . and facts provinces to our must regions the in Canada ; must reminded in our in of tire ; never we has must , the tire our the better She
 our ; better here tire that never the must in and , has people Canada tire provinces of efforts ; of we never reminded must to tire lives our the She . never regions facts struggle us for for the struggle we must the in our Senate the the we the in truth in of
 tire people never . the of here in to struggle provinces Senate of must in the struggle tire we lives truth regions has ; must us the in , for that never of in the better our efforts the and facts ; must Canada the for we we the our never our tire reminded She
 has of of facts She must people our our we the must in regions Canada struggle struggle provinces . ; the tire in to the here better for reminded , never in in the lives never tire we the the truth that our never the for efforts tire we and must ; of Senate us
 better our must Canada and never of has must in Senate tire of regions here for in truth efforts reminded facts struggle in the that tire . , in ; we us the ; never lives the to we our struggle never She our the tire the people the the of must provinces for we
 that in we Canada must the in reminded of regions the never the to tire must people the tire never for , us tire our of ; in in provinces struggle the we better of has never we lives here She our ; for facts efforts truth our Senate and struggle . the must the
 our reminded the lives for that must She our must Senate never the tire better never facts provinces of ; we in efforts the we people Canada tire of struggle and here for the . us never struggle in has of in must the , the regions to our ; the we tire in truth
 tire tire we for here our in has we Senate that , the struggle we never must the ; of us must for must in efforts to tire in Canada . of She the of reminded our the the ; in our never better provinces the lives struggle never people facts truth regions the and
Today, we have before us the resolution to amend section 93 of the Constitution Act, 1867.  
Briefly put, I support this resolution. 
I am also convinced that the majority of Catholic parents in Quebec who enjoy the guarantees provided under section 93 support this amendment, as do the majority of Protestant parents, who are in the same situation.  
However, the Quebec National Assembly will no longer be subject to legislation predating Confederation with respect to denominational instruction.  
These laws of Quebec that predate Confederation and concern Catholic and Protestant denominational schools have led to the creation of an unusual system, which gave Catholic and Protestant parents different rights, according to where they lived in the province.  
Catholic and Protestant school boards are thus to be found protected by the Constitution within the old limits of Montreal and Quebec City. 
Elsewhere in the province the Catholic school boards are not protected by the Constitution, except in predominantly Protestant districts, where Catholic parents are in the minority.  
Outside Montreal and Quebec City, the Constitution protects Protestant school boards if, in a district with a Catholic majority, the Protestant parents are in the minority.  
Honourable senators, educational reform has been a concern of Quebec governments for over 30 years. 
And one of the subjects that keeps coming back, since the publication of the Parent report in the 1960s, is the establishment of school boards on the basis of Canada's two official languages. 
The ongoing challenge was to reconcile linguistic school boards with the constitutional guarantee protecting Catholic and Protestant school boards in Montreal and Quebec City. 
Even though the Supreme Court approved the system contemplated in Bill 107, the theoretical coexistence of linguistic and denominational school boards proved impracticable.  
Obviously, it is primarily in Montreal that it appears most difficult to set up linguistic school boards without having to support an overlap and interpenetration of structures. 
Lorraine Pagé, of the Centrale de l'enseignement du Québec, testified before the committee that, in Montreal: 
...we would have a francophone school board that would include a Catholic sector, a Protestant sector, and another sector; we would also have an anglophone school board which would have a Catholic sector, a Protestant sector and another sector, and in addition to that there would be a Catholic school board - there are so many it gets confusing - where services would have to be offered to francophones and anglophones, and another school board for Protestants, where services would be offered to francophones and anglophones.  
This means that there would be at least four mandatory and separate school boards, including two with three mandatory sectors each and two others with two mandatory sectors each. 
As the witness said, there would be a superimposition of organizational structures. 
The same thing would happen in Quebec City. 
This would create unnecessary costs and complications in the annual registration of students, the assignment of personnel, the distribution of resources and the establishment of voters' lists.  
Some of the witnesses who appeared before the special joint committee seem to think that the debate on education that has been going on for over 30 years in Quebec is not only about freeing the Government of Quebec of the restrictions resulting from paragraphs (1) to (4) of section 93. 
 She has reminded us that here in the Senate of Canada , we must never tire in the struggle for the truth ; we must never tire in the struggle for the facts ; we must never tire in our efforts to better the lives of the people of our provinces and regions .
 in never . we Senate Canada our ; we truth people never of must the struggle tire ; provinces She in regions has tire facts for in must here we tire for efforts better the the never the our our lives of struggle , of in the and the must to that reminded the
 in of has tire in in truth people we ; of better , struggle we the ; our never the and must tire struggle regions efforts lives in She to the of that provinces Senate tire the the our our reminded must us we must the for here never Canada never . for the
 us of facts must of our the we in in people . here our to must She regions that reminded provinces we the never tire our tire efforts ; truth and must has in struggle the we never never better in the tire the ; for Senate lives the , for Canada of the
Senator Anderson has a wise and understanding heart. 
 Senator has and . a understanding heart wise Anderson
 wise . heart understanding has and Anderson Senator a
 and wise heart a . Anderson understanding has Senator
 Anderson wise a heart understanding Senator and has .
 has a and . Senator Anderson understanding heart wise
 Anderson and Senator a heart . wise understanding has
 Senator . heart and wise has a Anderson understanding
 has Anderson a understanding wise heart . and Senator
 has wise heart a . understanding Anderson and Senator
 heart a wise has understanding . Senator Anderson and
 . wise and understanding has a heart Anderson Senator
 Anderson a Senator and . heart understanding wise has
 Senator has wise understanding a and . Anderson heart
 and heart understanding . Anderson Senator wise a has
 has Anderson . wise and Senator a heart understanding
 understanding a Senator Anderson wise heart . and has
"Trust us," they say. 
One thing we can count on is if this government says it is good for Canada, it is not good for Canadians.  
At the time of the 1966 social contract with Canadians, the Liberals were in power. 
They entered into a social contract with their citizens. 
It was they who did it. 
"We will take your money and provide you with a pension," they said. 
As soon as they got their grubby hands on the cash, it was lent to the provinces at favourable interest rates. 
They were cheating Canadians who trusted that when they got old, they would have a pension. 
Baby boomers, who have paid all their working lives since the program's inception, now have the audacity to reach 50. 
We have had the audacity to reach 50!  
Senator Cools :
Not me.  
Senator Tkachuk :
Then they had the gall to limit their breeding, thus causing a situation whereby, 15 years from now, there will be fewer people working to pay for the people who turn 65 at that time. 
They limited their breeding. 
From what we know of social behaviour during the 1970s, abstinence was not the order of the day. 
People were, shall I say, "fuddling". 
It was not their fault; it was the fault of scientists. 
The cause, they say, was social behaviour. 
That is what caused the end of this pension plan. 
 Senator Anderson has a wise and understanding heart
 understanding and heart a . Anderson wise has
 understanding a Anderson wise Senator heart and .
 has Senator Anderson understanding a wise and heart
Hon. Orville H. Phillips :
 . H Hon Orville : Phillips .
 Hon . : . H Phillips Orville
 Hon . Phillips H : . Orville
 : Phillips H Hon . . Orville
 Hon Orville . . H Phillips :
 . . Phillips Hon H Orville :
 . Orville Phillips : Hon . H
 H Phillips : . . Orville Hon
 H Orville . . Phillips Hon :
 Orville . . Phillips Hon : H
 Hon Phillips . Orville . : H
 H Orville Hon . Phillips . :
 : . Hon Orville . H Phillips
 . Phillips Orville : . H Hon
 . Orville Hon H : . Phillips
 Phillips : H Hon . Orville .
That is why it is essential that a constitutional amendment be thoroughly reviewed by the Senate, otherwise we will be party to the Commons always having its will on us.  
The following, taken from the joint committee report, was not included as an afterthought, I can assure honourable senators: 
Sixteen Members of the House of Commons, and seven Senators, were named to this Special Joint Committee. 
Some of those Senators have stated that their participation in the Committee must in no way be seen as absolving them, or their Senate colleagues, from the Senate's constitutional obligation to assess any amendment proposed to the Constitution of Canada.  
I am already hearing cries of alarm from those who will claim that the Senate, by adopting this attitude, will cause a delay which could compromise the reforms the Government of Quebec has in mind. 
I would like to remind those with such concerns that the reforms are already happening, are far advanced even, and do not need amendment of section 93 to reach their conclusion.  
The amendment to section 93 will do away with the confessional school boards and the dissentient boards only, and these will have to stay in place until the end of the current academic year early next summer.  
Hence the argument that it is essential for Parliament to make a decision before the end of the year has no justification.  
I hope that honourable senators will not be taken in by the specious argument that the sooner we approve the resolution, the more we will show how well the federation works. 
That is a sentiment which was trumpeted ad nauseum by government supporters following the adoption of the resolution in the other place. 
It is a sentiment which is certainly not shared by members of the Quebec government. 
Constitutional amendments affect all Canadians, even if their immediate impact is felt in only one region of the country. 
They must not be treated lightly, particularly as they affect minorities. 
The federation's value lies in this country's historic respect for the individuality of minorities and for their desire not to have this individuality crushed by the numerical weight of the majority.  
What we are being asked to do in the final analysis is remove constitutionally guaranteed rights, as discriminatory as they may be by today's standards, and entrust them to a province which will honour them for a given period, with no guarantee that they will be incorporated on a permanent basis. 
The National Assembly has endorsed this unanimously, as did most witnesses who stayed with the issue, with varying degrees of enthusiasm. 
Prominent legal experts even argued that various Supreme Court decisions have interpreted section 93 in such a way that it has lost much of its significance.  
All this may be true, but there are still Quebecers who feel that by adopting the resolution they will be abandoned by the very Parliament whose responsibility it is to protect them.  
I wish to end my remarks by quoting from an opinion which was given to the Quebec government by what is known as the Catholic Committee of the Education Council of the province of Quebec, a consultative body which is asked to give its views on issues affecting the Catholic religion in schools. 
This opinion was written and delivered following the hearings of the joint committee. 
 Hon . Orville H . :
 . . Orville : H Hon
 Orville H : . Hon .
 . Phillips H . Hon :
Honourable senators, I should like to join in the tribute to my fellow senator and a fellow islander, Senator Anderson.  
 should fellow Senator islander . I my in like to senators Honourable join , senator fellow to , and the tribute a Anderson
 like senators Anderson tribute fellow a , should , . senator to to the in islander I fellow join my and Senator Honourable
 a join Honourable the like my and senator islander to fellow should . Senator in , to fellow senators tribute , Anderson I
 islander senator to my a to senators in fellow Anderson Senator Honourable should the , join like fellow , tribute I and .
 join Anderson to my like to should fellow a and senator tribute in senators . the , Honourable , I Senator islander fellow
 Senator a fellow join my I tribute . to Anderson , should fellow Honourable and to the senator islander in senators like ,
 in Honourable Senator a to I . fellow and my should Anderson like tribute senators , islander , to join the fellow senator
 join like Anderson fellow my , Senator and islander to Honourable to should a senators tribute , . I in fellow the senator
 fellow Honourable in fellow I join , a . islander , to my senator should tribute like senators to Senator and Anderson the
 Senator my islander and in Anderson join senators fellow like , I Honourable a should senator to the . , tribute fellow to
 join Senator Honourable I fellow in Anderson the . to should a , my and to like , tribute senators senator fellow islander
 should my tribute , Anderson fellow I senator , join to . Senator like the to Honourable and fellow in a islander senators
 tribute to senators I my fellow should , the , fellow Senator islander . join and to Honourable in like a senator Anderson
 tribute fellow in senator to , Anderson should to islander join like my I a , fellow and . Honourable the Senator senators
 islander , . my like the join Senator fellow senators to to Honourable and I senator tribute should fellow Anderson , a in
 my the should . Anderson islander join fellow senator and , I Honourable , to a senators Senator like in tribute fellow to
Answers to Order Paper Questions Tabled 
Energy-Department of the Environment-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Energy-Department of Justice-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Energy-Department of Multiculturalism-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Energy-Department of Natural Resources-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Defence-Status of Clothe the Soldier Project 
Defence-Status of the Armoured Personnel Carrier Replacement Program 
Business of the Senate 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
Second Reading-Debate Continued 
Canada Cooperatives Bill 
First Reading 
Criminal Code 
Interpretation Act 
Bill to Amend-Second Reading-Motions in Amendment-Debate Adjourned to Await Ruling of Speaker 
Motion in Sub-Amendment 
Quebec 
Linguistic School Boards-Amendment to Section 93 of Constitution-Report of Special Joint Committee Adopted 
Quebec 
Linguistic School Boards-Motion to Amend Section 93 of Constitution-Debate Adjourned 
 Honourable senators , I should like to join in the tribute to my fellow senator and a fellow islander , Senator .
 I senator fellow should like Senator Honourable fellow tribute senators , a the in join my islander to to . , Anderson
 my Honourable . should the a senators Senator tribute join fellow fellow senator and , Anderson islander in like I , to
 like Anderson fellow and , should a senator fellow to I . to the join Senator Honourable in islander senators , tribute
Perhaps it can be said that she arrived quietly, she served quietly and she left us quietly. 
 can that she left said quietly . served us quietly arrived she she quietly and , Perhaps it be
 quietly Perhaps quietly quietly can arrived she left said and served us it . that she be , she
 quietly she can said be Perhaps left and she it arrived she quietly , that served quietly . us
 she be served left quietly that . it she said arrived and quietly she can us quietly Perhaps ,
 , . left it that can Perhaps she she quietly arrived she us served and be quietly quietly said
 can quietly arrived it be she said us , served she quietly and left quietly Perhaps . that she
 arrived served and Perhaps can quietly she that left said she , us . quietly it she quietly be
 be can quietly said . quietly quietly that served she us Perhaps she arrived she , and it left
 she that quietly she be us quietly quietly , she it said served Perhaps . left arrived can and
 left . quietly and quietly she arrived quietly served Perhaps that she be , us it said she can
 be she . served arrived Perhaps quietly , quietly she that quietly said can left it she and us
 us , quietly be she she it served said and arrived quietly . Perhaps quietly left she that can
 us , . she quietly that she quietly it can Perhaps arrived quietly served she and be said left
 quietly and , it quietly she served . can Perhaps she arrived said quietly be she that us left
 be it Perhaps left arrived , she quietly quietly that us said served . and she can she quietly
 and us be Perhaps , that quietly left . quietly served quietly she she said can she arrived it
However, I am not aware that there have been discussions, either formal or informal, between the Prime Minister and the premiers up to this point in time.  
Immigration 
Tracking and Detention of Unsuccessful Refugee Claimants-Government Position 
Hon. Donald H. Oliver :
Honourable senators, my question to the Leader of the Government in the Senate is a continuation of the line of questions I had for the honourable leader yesterday. 
Will the Leader of the Government tell this chamber what plans are being considered to detain those who are dangerous, or who are judged to be unlikely to depart of their own free will? 
Where will they be detained, and under what controls to ensure that Canadians are protected?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, I take my honourable friend's question seriously, as I did the questions he put yesterday. 
I am still attempting to obtain clarification for him on this matter as soon as possible.  
Detention Facilities for Refugee Claimants-Request for Particulars 
Hon. Donald H. Oliver :
As the honourable leader knows, the Department of Immigration maintains detention facilities across the country. 
Can he tell us how many refugee claimants are presently in detention, the number of centres, and the annual cost to Canadians to maintain these centres?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Fisheries and Oceans 
Negotiations on Multilateral Agreement on Investment-Continuation of Limit on Foreign Ownership of Commercial Licences-Government Position 
Hon. Gérald J. Comeau :
Honourable senators, my question to the Leader of the Government in the Senate is in regard to the Multilateral Agreement on Investment. 
One of the fundamental objectives of the MAI is to treat non-resident investors as if they were domestic investors; what is called the national treatment principle. 
 Perhaps it can be said that she arrived quietly she served quietly and she left us quietly .
 can quietly quietly it . , be left Perhaps arrived quietly said she and that she us served
 she be it quietly us , . served arrived and she said can left Perhaps that quietly quietly
 she it Perhaps arrived be , quietly can left quietly served and us . that quietly she said
I am sure that one person who will miss her greatly is the Liberal whip. 
 is whip greatly will sure her who one I that . the Liberal am miss person
 miss one who her is that the greatly I whip person am will . sure Liberal
 person who whip Liberal I miss will that . her am one is greatly sure the
 greatly I will . is the her who Liberal that whip am person one sure miss
 is the person that sure Liberal miss whip . greatly who one am her will I
 sure the that miss her is whip Liberal who . will greatly person one I am
 one will sure greatly miss the whip I . is her am who person that Liberal
 person Liberal who . sure miss whip greatly am that the her I one will is
 that miss am one the sure . I person who will Liberal her whip greatly is
 that miss greatly sure whip am will Liberal I her one person . is the who
 am will . Liberal I one sure that miss whip is the greatly who person her
 one that Liberal . her is the am will sure person greatly whip miss I who
 I whip person will her that greatly . sure is Liberal am one the miss who
 one am is greatly the . I miss whip her who sure will person that Liberal
 . greatly is sure miss I her will am Liberal who whip one that person the
 one person that will . I who am greatly her Liberal whip miss the is sure
Some senators, including me, are interested in this bill from a personal point of view as well. 
This bill was brought in last week so that we could work on it. 
Now, we must complete that work and pass the bill by Christmas. 
I do not think that we are handmaidens. 
We do not have to take orders. 
We must do what is right.  
This bill has important consequences for many of us, and more particularly, for our children and our grandchildren. 
Those people who are already retired and at the age of 65 will receive all their benefits. 
For those people who are in the middle and who will soon be retiring, it is not a big problem for them. 
They will have some reduced benefits and some increased costs. 
To those people who have been paying all their lives - that is, all the baby boomers who will begin to turn 50 - they will receive benefits and be faced with another 15 years of increased costs.  
I will tell you for whom this is important. 
I have a daughter who is 24 and a son who is 21. 
Many of you have children and grandchildren. 
The government is asking them to pay 9.9 per cent - I am sure it is 9.9 per cent because the minister wanted the number to be under the figure 10. That represents 10 per cent of their income, and it will increase with inflation. 
The $35,000 that they pay on today will inevitably be more tomorrow.  
As inflation eats away at it and the numbers rise, that number remains the same. 
This goes against everything we have ever done on this program since its inception in 1966. 
It stays the same. 
In 10 or 15 years, that $3,500 will be worth $1,500, $1,000, $500, depending on what government does and what happens to inflation.  
 I am that one person who will miss her greatly is the Liberal whip .
 person Liberal miss greatly whip who will her . I that sure am the is
 that . will sure one who Liberal person the whip greatly I am miss her
 is Liberal person that sure am . the one miss greatly who will whip I
In the previous Parliament, when our numbers were fairly equal and committee attendance was most important, I often noticed that when the Liberals were short a member on a committee, it was Senator Anderson who came in and filled the spot.  
 were , Liberals a often short committee and in our committee previous on was the a equal and Anderson noticed came , Senator the who numbers most In fairly attendance I were the when . that was , Parliament when important filled spot it member
 in the In noticed who member , equal the filled our most were Senator . a was that short often numbers , came and fairly Liberals the and , it Anderson spot previous I attendance when committee committee was when a on were important Parliament
 equal came , and numbers our committee were often who it attendance committee . when were most previous , , a was on spot a important when member Anderson I In that noticed the fairly filled the Liberals short and was Parliament the Senator in
 our Parliament numbers filled on in when that were most was the attendance member , equal noticed were In when important often was Senator fairly and and it a , Anderson the , spot previous committee a committee who I the Liberals . short came
 Anderson were filled . important short , committee a member the came the were when it that noticed who Liberals in and I Senator a was when , the fairly previous often , and numbers attendance spot equal on In our Parliament was committee most
 the it In Liberals was came member , were attendance Senator in , equal fairly were committee noticed most on . a Parliament filled numbers spot the was important and a when when , I previous the who our that Anderson committee and short often
 committee Senator committee and filled , when important were the it our that short came often member a previous on was when , who and most were numbers was spot . fairly Anderson I , the noticed Liberals attendance a in In equal the Parliament
 when most Anderson I and spot in on the and important Parliament Liberals , filled it , committee previous Senator , was when noticed was attendance the In a came . were who often our that member fairly short numbers were equal committee the a
 numbers was was I committee , filled spot the came important the Senator and fairly and a often were previous our equal on noticed , Liberals member Anderson who were most the that a attendance in , when committee . short Parliament when it In
 it most were noticed and often equal was attendance a and spot the committee In were when Liberals Anderson our I came the the a , when , member previous on filled who numbers Senator . was Parliament fairly , in short that important committee
 the were member Senator equal when . the most I noticed committee short the numbers who , that were in attendance was , previous Liberals fairly and , Anderson a it filled spot came when on often and important committee our was In Parliament a
 when noticed and numbers and spot the In equal Liberals , attendance were Anderson the I our who short committee when member it the was were , previous in a on fairly Senator came that filled , often a . Parliament important was most committee
 the equal , who fairly in short noticed when were was . spot most important Liberals the our , Senator and a committee In came I was when committee the it often that filled and previous Parliament numbers member , on attendance a Anderson were
 , Senator , , fairly were member the came committee that and a a the our Anderson filled the who committee Liberals was in short I most often attendance noticed Parliament . equal In spot when on it important when numbers were was and previous
 when it committee most often a was In spot committee that fairly important were , our member I the filled Liberals short attendance previous , when were equal and noticed in came and numbers Parliament the Anderson , who was Senator the . a on
 member Senator when were it . when a spot came Parliament was committee , the attendance were who noticed Liberals the , equal In often that on short numbers and and , was our important in fairly filled a the previous I Anderson committee most
During that period, employee contributions rose from 1.85 per cent to 2.25 per cent of earnings, and the combined rate rose from 3.6 to 5 per cent.  
How many Canadians must pay the price for the planned increase in premiums?  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, I regret to interrupt the honourable senator, but his allotted time has expired.  
Senator Stratton :
I would like to finish my speech, if I may.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is leave granted for Honourable Senator Stratton to continue?  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
Senator Stratton :
Thank you, senators.  
In the Financial Post or The Globe and Mail it was recently explained that, as employers will have to pay higher CPP premiums and as most employers or companies have a limited budget for wages, they will have to pass on the cost to people through the price of their product, or they will have to lay people off, or they will have to go to contract workers.  
The concern is the long-term effect this huge increase will have on full-time jobs.  
On November 18, Senator Oliver said: 
Canadians who turn 69, 70, and 71 this year have only another month and a half to convert their RRSPs to an annuity or a RRIF. 
If they fail to do so, they could lose up to one-half of every dollar they have in their RRSPs to taxes; yet many of these same Canadians are not aware that the government has lowered the age to 69 and of the deadline for making the conversion.  
Indeed, a survey conducted last spring found that only about 30 per cent of RRSP holders aged 50 to 70 were aware of these new rules. 
Bearing this in mind, and considering the confusion that now exists about this matter, will the government consider extending the conversion time so as to ensure that no senior citizen is forced to hand over half of his or her life savings as a result of being caught off-guard by this proposal?  
In other words, will the government ensure that they are not nailed with more taxes?  
 In the previous Parliament , when our numbers were fairly equal and committee attendance was most important , I often noticed that when the Liberals were short a member on a committee , it Senator Anderson who came in and filled the spot .
 member noticed , most and I the often the in committee was when and came . , a it equal on Parliament fairly our when short , was Senator Liberals that numbers filled the who attendance important In committee a spot Anderson were were
 fairly most important attendance Anderson that equal came numbers and our the Liberals , a on the filled a Senator previous committee noticed often spot and Parliament were , committee the it I was member who short were , when In in when .
 In our who the the noticed was spot on , that numbers most it previous a was , were committee often committee . member and were the a when , filled Senator short attendance Parliament equal in came when and Anderson I Liberals important
As Senator Graham has mentioned, Senator Anderson had a successful teaching career at Prince of Wales College and the University of Prince Edward Island. 
 Senator Prince Prince University of Anderson successful has As career Island Wales College mentioned at , teaching a Graham of . had Senator the and Edward
 Prince the at College Wales Island a and career of As had teaching Graham of has Senator mentioned successful University Senator , Edward . Anderson Prince
 successful As , College Island . Prince of mentioned Graham career Edward Anderson a and Prince Wales the Senator teaching of Senator has at University had
 College As and Edward Graham , Senator . a the Prince Island Anderson of Prince of teaching had career has successful University mentioned at Senator Wales
 Island of Senator . , career Anderson has and teaching Edward of University at Prince Wales College mentioned a the Senator Prince As Graham successful had
 of successful Anderson career . at Wales had Senator Prince of a and College teaching University As Prince has Island Graham mentioned , Edward Senator the
 Senator University has Island had College Wales Edward . Senator mentioned As Graham Prince , the of of Prince a successful at and teaching career Anderson
 has mentioned University had successful As and Island Graham College Senator . Anderson Wales Prince Prince of of teaching , the a at Edward Senator career
 mentioned As Senator University , Anderson Prince Senator career Graham of at Prince . teaching of and the Wales Island has successful had a College Edward
 Prince Graham of Prince career of had University College As Edward mentioned , Wales and teaching Anderson successful . Senator a at Island Senator the has
 Prince Senator has As career mentioned of Graham had and the Edward . Senator University Prince teaching , of at Wales a successful College Anderson Island
 had of Wales at As Prince of has , Anderson Graham University mentioned career and College . the Senator Senator successful Island Prince Edward a teaching
 College Senator of As successful mentioned , career Island . a teaching and the Wales Graham has University Edward Anderson Senator had Prince Prince at of
 successful Anderson a . Edward the career Graham teaching mentioned As Wales of University Island has at and had Senator , College Senator Prince of Prince
 Prince mentioned successful Senator teaching Island a career at College . , Senator of Wales Graham of Anderson As and Edward had Prince the University has
 mentioned a Prince teaching Anderson Island career of , Edward University of Graham has at Wales Senator had . successful College Prince Senator the and As
I am not saying everything is managed perfectly in the private sector, but I will tell you that it is the people's own money. 
It is not public money. 
No one is forced to invest in Royal Trust.  
Senator Gigantès :
The public is made up of individuals. 
These individuals are private persons. 
Under the proposed system, they would invest in something which may not make huge profits, but which will not experience the disasters of the private sector.  
Senator Bolduc :
It is a matter of choice. 
Senator Gigantès :
With a system such as the one proposed, one thing is for sure. 
There will be no Trevor Eyton to squander the money, there will be no Conrad Black or Olympia & York to take it away from you.  
Senator Bolduc :
I do not want to answer questions on specific cases, because I find it objectionable.  
Hon. Gerry St. Germain :
Honourable senators, the honourable senator who has just spoken brings a wealth of experience to this chamber. 
He was one of the top bureaucrats and one of the top men in the Quebec government at one time. 
He brings that experience to this forum.  
I would prefer to ask this question of the government side, but no one will speak further on it. 
Therefore, I will ask Senator Bolduc.  
 As Senator Graham has mentioned , Senator Anderson had a successful teaching career at Prince of Wales College and the University of Edward Island .
 Edward had Anderson Senator Graham . University successful Prince and Wales As has teaching at College a Island Prince mentioned of the of Senator career
 Island Edward As mentioned had teaching , Anderson Graham Prince the College successful . has of at Senator Prince University Wales career and Senator a
 of Prince successful , teaching College a Anderson the had Edward career Senator has . of University As Wales mentioned Senator Graham at Prince Island
In addition, she was active in many organizations, such as the Canadian Federation of University Women and the Canadian Dietetic Association. 
 Women and In , as . Association she many , organizations such active Dietetic Canadian University the of was addition Federation Canadian in the
 was she Dietetic In many Federation such University organizations the active , Canadian , in as . Association Canadian of Women and the addition
 In , Canadian she Women , University Canadian of as the many . the Dietetic addition such organizations Association in was and active Federation
 Association , and Canadian , In University Women she addition organizations was of . such as many the Dietetic Federation the in active Canadian
 Canadian Women and the In as addition active Canadian was Federation , University many in the organizations of Association . Dietetic she , such
 many Canadian organizations University as such the she Canadian of Dietetic and Women in . , In was Federation Association , active addition the
 Canadian University Canadian Association many the , in addition In organizations Dietetic the as Federation such Women and . she of was , active
 the many was in addition . such Dietetic Canadian organizations In , Federation and Association of as , active University Canadian she Women the
 University such addition the , organizations and Canadian Federation was she of . in the many active Association , Women as In Canadian Dietetic
 active the Federation she Women and Association Dietetic , of Canadian as such , was University In addition . the organizations Canadian many in
 University In the Canadian Association active many she and Canadian Dietetic Federation organizations as , of such the in , . was Women addition
 University Federation as many the , Canadian In in was and Canadian organizations such active addition Association Women Dietetic the of , she .
 of as was Association Dietetic the Canadian in , the Women , she many In active Canadian organizations . and such University Federation addition
 many Canadian Association such she in was . University the In as Federation addition and of organizations Women active Canadian Dietetic the , ,
 organizations such . as of In Association was , in , Canadian she Canadian Dietetic University active addition the Women the Federation many and
 the , In Canadian Dietetic she . organizations and active in as was Canadian many of the addition Association University Federation such Women ,
Now they want to create a super-RRSP, which does not make any sense because, not only is it at odds with what they said in committee and what they said in the election campaign, it does not fit into their tax plan. 
Remember, they have a tax plan with a flat tax. 
With the flat tax, you reduce the amount of exemptions. 
We are not getting any ideas from them.  
Now I will turn to the Liberals.  
Senator Gigantès :
Be careful.  
Senator Tkachuk :
Since taking office, they have taken $300 million in new taxes from senior citizens by income-testing the age credit. 
They want Canadians to mature their RRSPs by the year they turn 69 rather than the previous age limit of 71. 
However, seniors do not know about it, and this will be another huge tax grab - Merry Christmas, Canada - by the Liberal Government and Paul Martin. 
Twice they have killed plans to increase the RRSP contribution limits so that people could put money away for their future given that the government will not provide for them.  
The Canadian Association of Retired Persons says that as many as 80,000 Canadians may fail to convert their RRSPs on time. 
Where are the big advertising programs of the Government of Canada which they mount when they really want to advertise something? 
This is a government program they do not want to advertise. 
They want it to slip in, just like this bill, so that people will not know and will not make the proper financial decisions, but instead will be exposed to a huge tax load for the year 1997. 
That is what Paul Martin wants, so that in February he can brag in his budget speech about how he has cleaned up the deficit - on the backs of the unemployed, on the backs of senior citizens, and on the backs of young people who will be paying the $400 million to the new pension plan.  
Senator Gigantès :
That is because over nine years you did nothing to address the deficit.  
Senator Tkachuk :
 In addition , she was active in many organizations , such as the Canadian Federation of University Women and the Canadian Dietetic .
 Association Canadian Federation such Dietetic as many addition In of was , , University the active . in Women organizations Canadian and she
 . she was and as many Canadian University , active organizations In Association the Dietetic of addition Federation such Women , in Canadian
 In active , Association of Canadian the such Canadian addition Dietetic she as in and University . Federation the Women organizations was ,
When I was talking to her brother this summer, he told me that she missed her friends in this chamber. 
 chamber missed her summer brother her she When , I he this told . this that me was to friends talking in
 missed me chamber this that told brother talking this . to friends , was her her she I summer When in he
 was me her this chamber her brother summer she to in friends told When that missed . I he this talking ,
 to summer in this was her friends he . she brother When told chamber this I , her that me missed talking
 missed told When this brother friends . talking in this , he I to me chamber that was her summer her she
 me this . he , summer this her told I was brother missed in she her talking When to friends that chamber
 was this this she that chamber friends , in summer her told talking me . her missed brother he When to I
 he missed brother summer When friends was her to talking . this I , she told me that this her in chamber
 that When friends . he I this this talking missed brother told to summer chamber her in her me , was she
 , her he this missed . friends chamber was that her summer talking this told in When me I brother to she
 summer this was that missed he I told this brother to When her in talking , she friends chamber her me .
 was to brother he this that me this When her , her friends I missed in summer . told talking she chamber
 missed that When told to this , she summer . talking me friends chamber I her he in her this was brother
 this missed he summer this that . in I her told brother chamber she , friends me was to When her talking
 chamber she . me summer that talking When this I , to in missed was he her friends told brother her this
 talking missed her brother me , friends she . this that her chamber was to in I told he When this summer
We owe it to them, our grandchildren and our children, to study this legislation thoroughly and to amend it, because it is not their fault that this program has been so badly managed. 
They will have little chance of collecting under the CPP, hence the changes the government intends to make.  
We are simply shovelling our hard-earned money into the greedy hands of Paul Martin, Minister of Finance, who wants to be the man who slays the deficit dragon, and we know how he intends to do it. 
He has followed three policy themes to accomplish that end.  
First, he has transferred much of the tax burden to the provinces, forcing what I call "downloaded increased taxes." 
Provincial and municipal governments, who were receiving less money, had to increase taxes. 
The government transferred debt.  
Second, this government has taken advantage of the low interest rates which resulted from the efforts of the Conservative government over eight years to bring the deficit and inflation under control and to bring interest rates down.  
Third, Paul Martin then not only raised licence fees and taxes, he used the accumulated surplus in the EI fund to pay down the deficit. 
It is this third policy theme with which we, on this side, feel most uncomfortable. 
He used the surplus in the EI fund, not to extend benefits, not to reduce premiums - which is normally what is done in a payroll deduction - but to cut benefits for a totally separate policy objective. 
He used this payroll tax purely and simply, to achieve his policy goal of cutting the deficit.  
That is why the Auditor General is prohibited from examining the fund unless the directors of the fund agree. 
It should not be for the directors to agree or disagree. 
Parliament must insist that the Auditor General report to us on the fund and on its administration. 
However, the Auditor General will report to the directors of the fund on how they manage their affairs. 
That is not acceptable.  
We are talking of $100 billion by the year 2006, and rapid increases thereafter. 
On this record, it will fail.  
It is an anomaly of governments to charge taxes for employment insurance premiums, and then reduce services to accumulate a surplus to pay down a deficit. 
 When I was talking to brother this summer , he told me that she missed her friends in this chamber .
 told summer in brother missed chamber to I her , When her was she that this . talking this me friends
 told this brother this her chamber . he talking When she in , me was I that to friends summer her
 her friends her missed , this he summer brother this was told that chamber When me she I to in talking
I know that she will remember her friends here but that she will be very happy to be back on our beautiful island with an even greater number of friends.  
 . that here number with remember of that happy I will know she will she our be on be island very friends to back greater friends an her beautiful but even
 even . will very beautiful she to of will our an but her happy on friends number that that be be know here back greater she friends island I with remember
 but even that here to she greater number remember beautiful will will back know her friends very our be be of happy . on friends that I with an she island
 island our happy beautiful number she of will to very be friends an on that be remember I that . greater her here even will she but know with back friends
 very be with she an her . that of that friends happy beautiful but back greater on remember will number to even our friends I here island know be she will
 that she I beautiful with our back that will but remember even here of will friends to be . an be her know she friends number island on happy very greater
 but that be to here very friends her an beautiful . on know with island she back our number I remember will greater that friends of be even she will happy
 beautiful be friends island our be number with on friends that very greater she even will happy here of will that but . an remember back she to her know I
 be she even I beautiful greater here she be happy island to on with . that but will her will know remember very number that back friends friends an our of
 she an be here number . island her back even will with that greater but very on friends I happy will to beautiful remember friends that our know she of be
 of be be on remember here very with to friends will she number happy but . an I know our her beautiful will greater friends back even she island that that
 greater on happy here but will be very friends she I even she will remember be that that beautiful our back island . number of an her with know to friends
 on here happy . island but of even be she back to beautiful remember friends know will be friends her number that will that with I greater an she our very
 her number an with friends that greater . be back that I but she know beautiful of our island friends on will even happy very be to she remember here will
 that here very but an our . beautiful remember will with back be even that friends island of to happy friends on greater she she be know I will her number
 but her number with here greater will be an friends very she beautiful know even friends that she island our to back I happy on . remember be will of that
However, committee members were assiduous in assuring all points of view were heard, unlike the Government of Quebec which chose not to have public hearings. 
This made our task doubly difficult.  
As senators, we are unlike any other evidence-gathering body. 
We gather evidence, we serve as our own advisors, seek our own counsel, we become judges, and we become the jury. 
We are the supreme court of the land when it comes to legislation. 
We must view the evidence before committees with care. 
I urge all senators, before they vote, to carefully review the full transcript of the evidence.  
Let me say at the outset that I was very sceptical, particularly after having read the Quebec resolution which was adopted unanimously in the Quebec Assembly, save for two abstentions, and which was quickly passed by the Quebec assembly requesting the federal government amend section 93 of the Constitution by deleting the subsections in so far as their application pertains to Quebec. 
These sections were incorporated in the British North American Act, 1867. 
The Quebec resolution in its fourth recital gave the Quebec assembly's opinion that the proposed amendment to section 93 requested in no way constituted recognition by the Quebec assembly of the Constitution Act, 1982, which was adopted without its consent.  
Honourable senators, noticing as you must that I am and remain a staunch supporter of the Constitution Act, 1982, this caused me great personal grief and concern.  
The first hurdle I had to overcome was whether or not the wording of the Quebec resolution on its face was so invidious, so egregious and so inconsistent that the recital made it inoperable and, in the process, would defeat its own request to amend the 1867 provisions by the mechanisms of the 1982 Constitution.  
I asked myself how the Province of Quebec could be asking for an amendment to the Constitution contained in the 1867 British North America Act, which was now part of the 1982 Constitution, while recognizing that the only methodology available to Parliament would be via the Constitution Act, 1982.  
Section 43 of the 1982 Constitution contains bilateral amendment processes between the federal government and provinces where their interests are solely engaged. 
Clearly, the only highway, the only path the Government of Quebec or the assembly of Quebec could take to achieve its objective was via the 1982 Constitution.  
Honourable senators, I then examined the federal resolution, which is the one we are being asked to consider. 
The federal resolution differs substantially from the Quebec resolutions. 
They are both appended to the report for your consideration.  
The federal resolution made reference not only to the 1982 Constitution, but to section 23 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedom incorporated in the Constitution Act, 1982.  
I concluded, after listening carefully to legal advice proffered before the committee, that the operative clause of any constitutional resolution was the wording of the amending clause itself. 
 I know she will remember her friends here but that she will be very happy to be back on our beautiful island with an even greater number of friends .
 happy even be will island very . be friends of I to beautiful number here with will that her on but friends know she our greater an she remember back
 will she be our know . to be island number greater her friends will back here that remember very an that I beautiful even happy on but she with of
 that know even her be on of with she friends an but . friends island greater remember to beautiful will back happy will here she our number very be that
Hon. Lorna Milne :
 Lorna Milne . : Hon
 Lorna . Milne : Hon
 Hon Milne : Lorna .
 Hon : Milne Lorna .
 Hon . : Lorna Milne
 Milne Lorna Hon : .
 Lorna Milne Hon : .
 Milne . Lorna Hon :
 Lorna . Milne : Hon
 Hon Lorna Milne : .
 . Milne Lorna Hon :
 Milne Lorna . Hon :
 . : Lorna Milne Hon
 Hon Lorna . Milne :
 Hon . Milne Lorna :
 Lorna Hon Milne . :
Rather, their interest was focused on the failure of section 23(1)( a ) of the Charter to be proclaimed in Quebec. 
As Senator Lynch-Staunton put it so well, it means that there are in effect two classes in Quebec as it presently pertains. 
If you are English speaking and you come from outside of Canada, your children will be streamed by the Quebec government into the French-language stream. 
That is unfair. 
They are not without some type of relief and I will address that later.  
However, this is an issue of linguistic rights. 
Here the question is not of linguistic rights but denominational privileges.  
In cross-examining Alliance Quebec, it was clear that they did not oppose the amendments to section 93 but rather the enforcement of section 23(1)( a ). Section 23(1)( a ) requires a proclamation by the Province of Quebec, and a declaration of this proclamation is, of course, not within federal powers. 
We gave that up in 1982.  
Senator Pitfield knows this well. 
He was an architect of the Constitution Act, 1982. 
It is clearly within the four corners of the assembly of Quebec to proclaim, if it chooses, section 23(1)( a ). Many of us are unhappy with this aspect of section 23(1)( a ). Students in over 13,000 families have been precluded from entering the English stream because the Province of Quebec has refused to proclaim section 23(1)( a ). 
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Who put it in?  
Senator Grafstein :
Rather, they wished to use this opportunity to leverage the Government of Quebec to proclaim section 23(1)( a ). This the Quebec government was clearly not prepared to do.  
The second group, the aboriginal groups within Quebec, claimed that this resolution detrimentally affected their rights. 
The report makes clear - and we came to this conclusion aided and abetted by legal advice and statements by both Quebec and federal ministers - that aboriginal rights were in no way, shape or form, affected by this resolution. 
We said so in the report.  
This left two groups, small but important, who claim to be detrimentally affected. 
 . Lorna Milne :
 Hon . : Milne
 Hon Milne . :
 Lorna Hon : Milne
Honourable senators, I would like to add a few words of tribute to Senator Doris Anderson, who was my seatmate in this place for most of our short time here together.  
 add my few of together this . , short I to who Anderson was seatmate like for Senator senators to of place tribute Honourable here most would in words , a time our Doris
 who , in short Honourable senators together to for was Senator seatmate , this place of my of most words add a Doris our time would here like to few . Anderson tribute I
 like . most Senator to place senators Anderson of words our would short I was in here of together this time a for few my to Honourable Doris add tribute , , seatmate who
 words like who , place of Honourable add in Senator most . to few my seatmate together time to senators I Doris , tribute this short our here of Anderson for was would a
 few of , Doris words our add Senator to was short Anderson senators I place Honourable who like to in together of time for a this seatmate , most would . tribute my here
 like our add Anderson , together tribute to Honourable my would this time Doris to most Senator I senators in seatmate was , of short for . a few place words here who of
 time few Honourable . was I Doris of seatmate together my this in , to for like most who senators words Senator place short our of add to a , tribute here would Anderson
 time would this , place my like Anderson together to who here Honourable of our . in for words seatmate tribute Doris to I few short most Senator was of , a add senators
 Doris add , of Senator time for would short to . like most place Anderson Honourable a I seatmate tribute of my was few in this our words to here senators , who together
 place tribute in , senators to here Anderson this most who , for together Doris . of my was a I of to short words Honourable seatmate add our would Senator like few time
 like my . Honourable who , to together in add of I Doris Senator , few place words senators time most would for was seatmate this a here our to of Anderson tribute short
 who for of of this , time most . would Senator to place Honourable together add to I short like my in our words tribute was few seatmate here Doris senators a , Anderson
 senators Anderson would time Honourable this my together I seatmate Senator in of for who tribute add , our , a . Doris to short words here was few of most place to like
 to to together Senator Doris for place time I most tribute was add , like our a my Anderson seatmate short of . would who , of few this here in Honourable senators words
 like to Doris I who a time senators , our Honourable of for place my most . short this would in Senator here , words add was seatmate together few to Anderson of tribute
 , few short for this together , tribute Doris Honourable senators Anderson seatmate of words time Senator place my . most in was our to add to would who I here like of a
The Government of Quebec knew this. 
We in Parliament knew this. 
Hence, I and others on the committee insisted that Quebec representatives be invited, despite reports we read in the press to the contrary, that the Quebec representatives would not attend at Ottawa.  
Finally, representatives of the Government of Quebec were invited to attend, which they did, together with members of the opposition. 
They appeared before the committee so that this point and other questions could be addressed.  
Members of the committee were pleased when the Minister of Education, Madame Marois, and the Minister of Federal-Provincial Affairs, Mr. Brassard, accepted our invitation to appear.  
Minister Brassard repeated the well-worn, often-repeated, proposition that no Quebec government will feel bound to recognize the 1982 Constitution. 
Minister Brassard then acknowledged, almost in the same breath, that under the law of the land, under the Supreme Court of Canada, the Province of Quebec was indeed bound by the Constitution Act, 1982. 
This is now clear and unequivocal.  
Clearly and fairly, the Province of Quebec deems itself bound by the 1982 Constitution. 
On the testimony received and based on my personal review, I concluded that the federal government indeed had the power under the 1982 Constitution, section 43, to accede to Quebec's request.  
That Parliament should or would exercise such power was obviously a much more difficult question. 
We recognize, under our Constitution, the nature of the exclusivity of this aspect of education under the Constitution as a provincial matter. 
This question, in pith and substance, is a matter of provincial education within the powers of the Province of Quebec. 
Then, honourable senators, came the more complicated problem alluded to by Senators Wood, Pitfield, Bolduc, Lavoie-Roux and Kirby and Lynch-Staunton, namely, how to determine whether or not, as defenders of the Constitution, we in the Senate could satisfy ourselves that there was a majority of the so-called "minorities" affected by any proposed diminution of their rights or privileges. 
All senators agree that one of our paramount duties in the Senate is to safeguard the Constitution and the rights of the minorities under that Constitution.  
I shall now turn to the essence of section 93, which is called by some commentators, a "Pocket Bill of Rights." 
That is a misnomer.  
In essence, section 93 is a series of privileges rather than full rights. 
Clearly, this is not the case here. 
 Honourable senators , I would like to add a few words of tribute to Senator Anderson , who was my seatmate in this place for most of our short time here together .
 Anderson Doris my senators our tribute together like , Senator for place to of in seatmate Honourable most here to time few . this was add would words , who a I of
 would was , Senator place our in . Doris together time Honourable most here , who add few to seatmate of my senators a words Anderson I short for like this tribute to
 to this place I my like for Doris senators Senator tribute of Honourable was of in time together here seatmate , to words would most , few our . who a short Anderson
As Senator Phillips has said, she was a quiet woman. 
 . Phillips Senator she a has was , As quiet said woman
 , was . Phillips has woman a As quiet she said Senator
 said woman , has was Phillips . quiet a she As Senator
 she a was said , woman has . Phillips As quiet Senator
 . Phillips As was she quiet , woman Senator has said a
 a was has Senator . said Phillips she woman quiet As ,
 Phillips Senator . quiet woman As a she said has was ,
 Senator she , quiet a was woman said As has . Phillips
 has As . , quiet a Phillips was Senator she woman said
 . Senator she has said As Phillips a , was quiet woman
 woman has was quiet . , Senator Phillips said she a As
 quiet , As a said Senator she was has woman Phillips .
 she . was has quiet , a Phillips As woman said Senator
 Senator has a As Phillips she said . quiet , was woman
 a quiet she Senator woman was said , Phillips has As .
 a Senator she . , quiet woman was As has Phillips said
Honourable senators, is leave granted?  
Senator Kinsella :
It depends upon the answer.  
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, we must make an effort to allow committees to sit. 
They do invite witnesses, many of whom come from out of town. 
We inconvenience them if we are not able to hear from them.  
I must congratulate senators on this side who have refrained, for the most part, from making Senators' Statements on Wednesdays, unless it was something quite urgent, as was Senator Kenny's statement today. 
They have tried to make their speeches on either Tuesdays or Thursdays. 
Senators on the other side have attempted to do the same thing. 
With that level of cooperation, perhaps at some time in the future we can invoke a more formal process whereby there will be some guarantee to committee chairs.  
Barring that formal process, Senator Stewart has witnesses to hear from tomorrow, and I should like him to have permission to hear those witnesses tomorrow.  
Hon. John Lynch-Staunton (Leader of the Opposition) :
That worked for a while. 
Now we have forgotten Mondays, but we have continued on with the practice of having early sittings on Wednesdays. 
As a result, Wednesday has become a normal working session, going on until five or six o'clock. 
The whole purpose of starting the session at 1:30 p.m. has been defeated.  
I do not think it is correct, unless there is an urgency, for committees to sit at the same time as the chamber. 
This is not for appearances' sake, but because the work done here can often be as important in the debates as what goes on in committees. 
At various stages of our work - the introduction of bills, second reading, committee referral, then third reading - we are often doing several at the same time. 
 As Senator Phillips has said , she was a quiet woman
 has As she Phillips a said , Senator woman . was
 quiet woman Phillips , said As a . was Senator has
 said has As . Senator , woman a was quiet she
However, she had a very keen insight into the issues that came before us, and into the human condition. 
 . human she came had keen and However into condition , that issues us insight , a into the very before the
 she keen insight and us condition the a , that very issues , into . before into came However had the human
 a . she However issues had the came very keen the , human into us , insight condition and that before into
 the she and that us human , . came into keen insight , a before the very condition into However had issues
 human very came the . that insight and , into keen the she , a However before into us issues condition had
 before into the However human had a into , , very she that . the issues condition and insight keen came us
 came into and keen before us insight condition However had . she , very that human a , the the into issues
 into insight before she the human . , However into the had very and came a that keen , condition us issues
 into before she and us the into insight that very However . human keen issues , the had , condition came a
 , and insight into she However condition , into keen that the human had came before very issues a us the .
 into very issues insight However . keen condition the a human us and that she , , came before the into had
 , insight into human that the issues she before However into . , came us and a had the keen very condition
 human she the the However that , insight came had into keen condition and very . , before a into us issues
 the condition human However a keen , that very into , issues had before the insight and into us she . came
 the had However keen . issues she us , and , human very the into before insight into condition a that came
 before keen that and issues condition us a human insight the came into she very . into , had the However ,
Changes to Canada Pension Plan-Accountability and Transparency of Investment Board-Undertaking to Publish Quarterly Financial Statements-Government Position 
Changes to Canada Pension Plan-Investment Board Not Subject to Access to Information Act-Government Position 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
Commemoration of Fiftieth Anniversary-Plans of Government 
Activities planned around December 10, 1997 for the launch of the 50th Anniversary commemorative year of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) 
National Defence 
Lack of Helicopter for Number of Navy Frigates-Government Position 
Forestry 
Demolition of Government Laboratories-Possibility of Restoration of Funding-Government Position 
Answers to Order Paper Questions Tabled 
Energy-Department of the Environment-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Energy-Department of Justice-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Energy-Department of Multiculturalism-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Energy-Department of Natural Resources-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Defence-Status of Clothe the Soldier Project 
Defence-Status of the Armoured Personnel Carrier Replacement Program 
Business of the Senate 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
Second Reading-Debate Continued 
Canada Cooperatives Bill 
 However , she had a very keen insight into the issues that came before us and into the human condition .
 and that before a , However insight she . very , had the us keen issues condition human came into the
 into before condition human had , us insight came the the very . a issues However that keen into and she
 , issues into , . and us However came had the insight before the a condition very she into that human
I must say I delighted in her sharp comments to me while sitting here.  
 I sitting in sharp her comments must here delighted while to me . I say
 to I her I in me comments . sharp sitting while must say delighted here
 here me comments sharp to in I must sitting . say delighted while I her
 delighted I sitting in say to must her comments here I while sharp . me
 must I to me her comments while sharp sitting say . I here delighted in
 delighted while me I to sharp . sitting here say I in her must comments
 while I I me her say sharp must sitting comments here in delighted . to
 I I to me here delighted sitting while comments . sharp must say her in
 sitting comments say must sharp delighted in while I I here to . her me
 comments to sharp her here while me I in I must say sitting delighted .
 say me while I her I must here . to sharp in sitting comments delighted
 here in must . I comments to delighted me while sitting I her say sharp
 in here say to must her sitting while comments delighted sharp me I I .
 must sitting while me . here to sharp her in I delighted say I comments
 comments say . sitting must sharp in here I I delighted her while to me
 in sharp I me here . delighted sitting while say comments to I her must
What does the law say on secession?  
Senator Graham :
The government has asked the Supreme Court of Canada to rule on the legality of unilateral secession.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
I had thought that Mr. Dion answered that question himself on the weekend when he said that a UDI would be illegal.  
Senator Nolin :
The Prime Minister has said he was prepared to negotiate. 
The Leader of the Government in the Senate has said the government is not prepared to negotiate.  
This morning, the Quebec minister of intergovernmental affairs, Mr. Brassard, said, and I quote: 
This is what we have always said.  
Bear in mind that this minister is a separatist. 
I repeat what he said: 
This is what we have always said.  
Mr. Chrétien has acknowledged that the federal government would negotiate. 
Could the Leader of the Government in the Senate tell us under what authority the Prime Minister could negotiate?  
Senator Graham :
The Prime Minister would be negotiating on behalf of Canadians, but recognizing at the same time that nine other provinces and the territories are involved. 
I am sure the Prime Minister would take all of that into consideration.  
Senator Nolin :
The Supreme Court received the request from your government to decide on the issue of Quebec's secession. 
 I must I delighted in her sharp comments to me while sitting here .
 to sharp must delighted her I me in comments sitting here while say I
 to delighted say I while in here sitting her I sharp . comments me
 . while to in I sharp sitting her me say comments delighted I must
She came with a background in nutrition, education and mental health. 
 a background She , nutrition came mental education . and health in with
 a health She background nutrition in . came with , and mental education
 in health with came education She mental . , nutrition and a background
 health with . nutrition , She background a came education in and mental
 nutrition and came She . in background with , mental education a health
 came in background , a with mental health and nutrition She . education
 She background education nutrition mental . , a came in with and health
 came and in education a She nutrition with mental background . health ,
 health came She mental in with nutrition , and a . background education
 , background health with . in mental She a nutrition and came education
 with in , . background She and health a came education nutrition mental
 came mental background a and in She , with health nutrition education .
 She , in education came background mental and . nutrition with health a
 in nutrition . health came background and She education a with , mental
 came mental with and a education . background She , nutrition in health
 came with mental She background a , nutrition and . health education in
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Atlantic Provinces Equal to Increase in Social Transfers-Government Position 
Hon. Brenda M. Robertson :
Honourable senators, I have a supplementary that goes back to questions raised by the Honourable Senator DeWare. 
I will come back to this again tomorrow and the next day.  
I should like to know from the Leader of the Government in the Senate whether the cuts we discussed yesterday in the social transfer payments for Atlantic Canada represent the increases in the social transfers that were announced twice previously by this government? 
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
No, not that I am aware, but it is an interesting question. 
I will bring forth an answer.  
Delayed Answers to Oral Questions 
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, I have a response to a question raised in the Senate on November 25, 1997, by the Honourable Senator Oliver regarding changes to the Canada Pension Plan and the Investment Board; a response to a question raised in the Senate on November 19, 1997, by the Honourable Senator Oliver regarding the Investment Board not being subject to Access to Information; a response to a question raised in the Senate on October 23, 1997, by the Honourable Senator Kinsella regarding commemoration of the 50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights; a response to a question raised in the Senate on November 20, 1997, by the Honourable Senator Forrestall regarding the lack of helicopters for a number of navy frigates; and a response to a question raised in the Senate on November 20, 1997, by the Honourable Senator Spivak regarding the demolition of government laboratories and the possibility of a restoration of funding.  
Human Resources Development 
Changes to Canada Pension Plan-Accountability and Transparency of Investment Board-Undertaking to Publish Quarterly Financial Statements-Government Position 
(Response to question raised by Hon. Donald H. Oliver on November 25, 1997) 
Bill C-2 requires that the Board prepare unaudited quarterly statements and provide them to the federal and provincial Ministers of Finance. 
The Board may choose to make those statements directly available to the public but the legislation does not require this.  
During the consultations on the draft CPP legislation, including House of Commons Finance Committee hearings, several pension fund experts recommended against publishing quarterly statements. 
They argued that the routine publication of quarterly results could tend to draw attention away from the longer-term investment objectives of the Board. 
Other large pension funds like the Ontario Municipal Employees Retirement System and the Ontario Teachers Pension Plan do not publish their quarterly results for these reasons. 
For a pension fund, long-term investment performance is paramount.  
 She came with a background in nutrition , and mental health .
 . with mental in and nutrition education a She came , health
 with mental background nutrition She came in a , . education health
 mental came . in health a education nutrition background and She ,
She had her Bachelor of Science from Acadia University and a Master of Science from Cornell University. 
 from from had Cornell of a Master Science of University and her University . Science Bachelor Acadia She
 of Science from Bachelor University of . Science Acadia a and her She had from Cornell Master University
 University Science University from Bachelor She Science Master of a Cornell of and from had her . Acadia
 from of Acadia Master University Science a She from her Cornell Science Bachelor had and . of University
 Bachelor a her Science from of Science Cornell and Acadia Master University had She . University of from
 Master Science of Acadia her had She . Cornell of Bachelor Science and from from University University a
 Science Master Acadia her from University of University Science from a of She Bachelor had . Cornell and
 Science University had Bachelor University her of Science from and of Master from Cornell . a Acadia She
 Acadia . University Science Science Cornell Master from from University had of a her and Bachelor She of
 Science her University Science from Acadia had Master a Cornell from of Bachelor She of . University and
 a University from Master University had Science her Science . of of Cornell Bachelor She from and Acadia
 University had a Acadia from and Master of She Science of Cornell Bachelor Science her from . University
 She of her had of University and Science from Cornell University . Bachelor Acadia Science from a Master
 Bachelor and Science her of a University She from of Science Acadia from University Master Cornell had .
 from University Bachelor had of and her from University a of Science . Science She Master Cornell Acadia
 Science . a Science She of Master of Cornell and University University from from had Bachelor Acadia her
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Provinces-Effect on Atlantic Provinces 
Environment 
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Support by Provinces of Government Position taken at Kyoto-Request for Particulars 
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Target Year for Implementation of Government Position taken at Kyoto-Government Position 
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Informetrica Study on Meeting Targets-Government Position 
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Concept of Differing Targets-Government Position 
National Unity 
Recent Remarks of Prime Minister-Possible Conditions of Secession of Quebec-Government Position 
Immigration 
Tracking and Detention of Unsuccessful Refugee Claimants-Government Position 
Detention Facilities for Refugee Claimants-Request for Particulars 
Fisheries and Oceans 
Negotiations on Multilateral Agreement on Investment-Continuation of Limit on Foreign Ownership of Commercial Licences-Government Position 
National Defence 
Search and Rescue Helicopter Replacement Program-Possible Cabinet Discussion on Awarding Contract for Helicopter Purchase-Government Position 
Search and Rescue Helicopter Replacement Program-State of Sea King Helicopter Fleet-Government Position 
Federal-Provincial Relations 
Reduction in Transfer Payments to Atlantic Provinces Equal to Increase in Social Transfers-Government Position 
Delayed Answers to Oral Questions 
Human Resources Development 
 She had her Bachelor of Science from Acadia University and a Master of from Cornell University .
 her Cornell of Bachelor of Science . University Acadia She Science University from had and Master a
 from She Bachelor of her of Science Science Acadia had a Master University Cornell . from and
 Bachelor Science . of and University Cornell Master her from had She Acadia of University from Science
Her career in the teaching profession has been outlined to honourable senators by Senator Graham.  
 in Her . profession Graham to outlined honourable by teaching has career been Senator the senators
 in teaching been . Graham career has to profession Her honourable outlined senators Senator by the
 outlined has Her teaching honourable by profession career in the been . senators Senator to Graham
 teaching the Her profession has . by career senators to in outlined been Senator Graham honourable
 by in been the to honourable Graham Senator Her . outlined profession teaching has career senators
 teaching outlined in profession . Graham been has by career Senator senators the to Her honourable
 has to . in teaching the career by honourable been Her Senator outlined senators Graham profession
 career by Her teaching in Graham been the has senators . honourable to outlined profession Senator
 profession teaching honourable outlined the to Her . in by has Senator Graham been senators career
 profession senators to Graham Senator honourable career been the outlined Her in by . has teaching
 senators honourable profession in has Graham career been by teaching Her to Senator the . outlined
 teaching . Senator outlined Graham senators the honourable Her profession in has to been by career
 outlined career honourable to teaching has Graham senators Her Senator been by the in . profession
 . career Her outlined to senators teaching honourable been profession in has the Senator Graham by
 career in to Her Graham has outlined Senator by been the honourable profession . teaching senators
 profession senators has teaching career in been outlined honourable to Graham the by Senator . Her
The honourable leader stated that a cut in the EI premium would cost the government some $4.2 billion in lost revenues. 
I would point out to him that this amount may be overstated by 25 to 50 per cent, because it fails to take into consideration increased revenue through greater employment and investment that would be generated by a reduction in premiums.  
Be that as it may, the honourable leader will no doubt recall that in 1995, the Minister of Finance indicated that when the EI surplus reached $5 billion, we would reduce premiums to the break-even point because the surplus would then be sufficient to deal with a recession equivalent to the recession of 1990.  
Accordingly, would the Leader of the Government tell us for what purpose the government is accumulating a $7-billion surplus in the fund for this calendar year, a surplus which will total $13 billion by December 31, and $15 to $16 billion by the end of the fiscal year, namely March 31, 1998? Would the Leader of the Government clarify today whether the amount in excess of $5 billion is designed to deal with a future recession of a two- to three-year duration, with the unemployment rate in the range of 11 to 12 per cent, or is it simply a surtax on jobs through high EI premiums, with a view to using the accumulated surplus to reduce the deficit?  
My concern is that the youth do not believe that, when they reach their retirement age, they will see a nickel of the Canada Pension Plan. 
My kids do not, and I understand that Senator Tkachuk's kids do not. 
If our children are thinking that, then I am certain many more people out there are thinking the same thing. 
Does the government not owe it to these youth of today to say that, in five or ten years, yes, the fund will be on good ground? 
I am sure it is trying, but somehow the message is not getting through. 
As a result, when the bill comes to us for consideration, all hell breaks loose.  
I do not think Canadians are aware of what is taking place in this place today, or what will happen as a result of passage of this bill. 
It will have a multiplier effect. 
Not only are we dealing with the Canada Pension Plan, but we are also dealing with the modernization of the other parts of the retirement structure, the Guaranteed Income Supplement and the Old Age Security. 
When you put all of that together, over time, Canadians, and particularly our youth, will say that enough is enough. 
You cannot have high EI premiums or high taxation through high EI premiums to pay your deficit down; then jack up your rates on the Canada Pension Plan; and then modify the OAS and GIS such that people receive reduced payouts, because you are hitting the same generation. 
You have bought off the seniors, and you are hitting the kids. 
They will not forget that.  
On October 30, Senator Tkachuk asked the following: 
Why is the government trying to fix the CPP by hitting hardest those least able to afford it?...  
Could the Leader of the Government in the Senate prevail upon his colleague the Minister of Finance to have his officials produce information showing the impact of the freeze in the earnings exemption for different ranges of income?  
 Her career in the teaching profession has been outlined to honourable senators Senator Graham .
 Graham teaching in has the been honourable outlined senators Senator Her to by profession .
 in been . career Senator to honourable senators Graham teaching profession has by Her outlined
 Graham been . has Her Senator the outlined by honourable teaching to career in senators
She was widely published and respected in her chosen profession. 
 respected was her published . She widely profession in chosen and
 in was chosen her respected . profession published widely and She
 chosen and profession . respected She in widely was her published
 She respected was . chosen widely published and in her profession
 profession widely in was published her . She respected and chosen
 respected her . chosen published and She profession widely in was
 in profession She was . widely published her and chosen respected
 profession . and published in widely her She was respected chosen
 was profession and in respected . She chosen published her widely
 chosen She her . published was in and widely respected profession
 widely published and . profession respected chosen her in was She
 profession widely chosen respected was . published and her in She
 in widely . and profession chosen her was published She respected
 her chosen and profession published widely in . was She respected
 chosen in her She was profession and published respected widely .
 profession was widely respected her . chosen She in and published
Honourable senators, Quebec's partial exemption from section 23 was initiated and approved by Mr. Chrétien by including the following in the Constitution Act, 1982: 
59(1) Paragraph 23(1)( a ) shall come into force in respect of Quebec on a day to be fixed by proclamation issued by the Queen or the Governor General under the Great Seal of Canada.  
(2) A proclamation under subsection (1) shall be issued only where authorized by the legislative assembly or government of Quebec. 
Section 23(1)( a ), from which Quebec is exempted by the authors of the Constitution Act themselves, requires that Canadian citizens: 
Finally, I want to comment on the notion of joint committees, particularly those charged with studying a particular item within a given period. 
It was said here, and repeated before the committee, that participation by the Senate must not be interpreted as an abandonment by it of the obligations imposed on the Senate in matters of constitutional amendments. 
It is true that, alone, we cannot defeat an amendment of this nature, as the Senate may be overruled by the House of Commons. 
However, as was shown in the case of the first Term 17 resolution, although the Senate impact on a constitutional amendment is limited, its efforts in this regard can be most constructive. 
I am convinced that if the amendments to it, which the Senate forwarded to the House, had been accepted, Parliament would not be faced with a second Term 17 resolution as it is now, as the Senate amendments satisfied the affected minorities while respecting the Government of Newfoundland's objectives.  
The joint committee was not given enough time to review the Quebec resolution with the care it deserved. 
Witnesses were impressive in numbers, but time restrictions affected their presentations, and questions and answers were too often incomplete when they were not cut short. 
Joint committees of this sort benefit the government, not Parliament, as they are limited in both latitude and independence by the government's control over their agenda. 
This is not meant as a reflection on the work done by the co-chairmen or those who participated on the committee, who I again thank for their excellent work, in particular the co-chairmen, for they toiled under difficult circumstances. 
It is a comment on the concept itself and one, I gather, which can also be applied to the joint committee which has just completed its study of the proposed amendment to Term 17.  
Should joint committees become the rule rather than the exception, and two-thirds of the membership is drawn from the House of Commons, how can one expect sober second thought to win even persuasive arguments? 
That is why it is essential that a constitutional amendment be thoroughly reviewed by the Senate, otherwise we will be party to the Commons always having its will on us.  
The following, taken from the joint committee report, was not included as an afterthought, I can assure honourable senators: 
Sixteen Members of the House of Commons, and seven Senators, were named to this Special Joint Committee. 
Some of those Senators have stated that their participation in the Committee must in no way be seen as absolving them, or their Senate colleagues, from the Senate's constitutional obligation to assess any amendment proposed to the Constitution of Canada.  
I am already hearing cries of alarm from those who will claim that the Senate, by adopting this attitude, will cause a delay which could compromise the reforms the Government of Quebec has in mind. 
 She was widely published respected in her chosen profession .
 widely . her chosen published She in respected and was
 . published and She was widely profession chosen respected her
 was and her chosen profession respected . in widely published
Her work had a particular focus on children and on celiac disease. 
 on had a on and disease . focus children particular Her celiac work
 a Her work focus and . celiac disease children particular on had on
 work disease Her had particular . focus a on celiac on and children
 and work Her celiac focus a on . had particular disease children on
 celiac disease . and had work children on focus Her on particular a
 on and children particular celiac had . work Her focus on disease a
 children on on celiac particular had disease work a . and focus Her
 disease on work on focus celiac a and Her children had . particular
 work . Her focus particular celiac had disease children on a and on
 Her focus disease a on particular on and celiac work children had .
 had children on work a on Her particular . disease celiac and focus
 . had work Her children focus and on particular celiac disease a on
 a on children celiac particular Her and . disease work had focus on
 disease . had focus celiac particular a on children and on Her work
 had and . work a on particular children on disease focus Her celiac
 children . particular Her a and on on disease had work celiac focus
They are off in left field somewhere, although I do not think they would want to be described that way.  
Now they want to create a super-RRSP, which does not make any sense because, not only is it at odds with what they said in committee and what they said in the election campaign, it does not fit into their tax plan. 
Remember, they have a tax plan with a flat tax. 
With the flat tax, you reduce the amount of exemptions. 
We are not getting any ideas from them.  
Now I will turn to the Liberals.  
Senator Gigantès :
Be careful.  
Senator Tkachuk :
Since taking office, they have taken $300 million in new taxes from senior citizens by income-testing the age credit. 
They want Canadians to mature their RRSPs by the year they turn 69 rather than the previous age limit of 71. 
However, seniors do not know about it, and this will be another huge tax grab - Merry Christmas, Canada - by the Liberal Government and Paul Martin. 
Twice they have killed plans to increase the RRSP contribution limits so that people could put money away for their future given that the government will not provide for them.  
The Canadian Association of Retired Persons says that as many as 80,000 Canadians may fail to convert their RRSPs on time. 
Where are the big advertising programs of the Government of Canada which they mount when they really want to advertise something? 
This is a government program they do not want to advertise. 
They want it to slip in, just like this bill, so that people will not know and will not make the proper financial decisions, but instead will be exposed to a huge tax load for the year 1997. 
That is what Paul Martin wants, so that in February he can brag in his budget speech about how he has cleaned up the deficit - on the backs of the unemployed, on the backs of senior citizens, and on the backs of young people who will be paying the $400 million to the new pension plan.  
Senator Gigantès :
That is because over nine years you did nothing to address the deficit.  
 Her work had a particular on children and on celiac disease .
 focus and Her a . celiac children on had on particular work
 on . children Her disease celiac particular had and on focus work
 work . children and disease particular celiac on focus had on a
Her significant contribution to public health was recognized in 1982 when she received the Order of Canada.  
 public to . Order she health 1982 recognized in Canada received contribution Her the significant of was when
 when Her . 1982 public significant the to contribution in was Canada received Order recognized she of health
 to Order Her received in health of 1982 she was the recognized Canada . when contribution significant public
 Her Order the in public she was of health significant received recognized Canada to . 1982 contribution when
 received of 1982 the contribution Her health recognized public . in significant Order to when she was Canada
 contribution to the Her received in 1982 recognized significant of was public Canada when health . she Order
 in the Her contribution received recognized when she significant . 1982 of was public to Canada health Order
 health to significant Order recognized Her . she contribution public when received the of 1982 in was Canada
 Her she Order . 1982 Canada of when contribution significant the health recognized public received in was to
 Order received Canada health the of when was 1982 recognized to contribution . public she in significant Her
 was 1982 health . Order when received significant public the she recognized in of to contribution Her Canada
 in Canada recognized public contribution significant she Her Order received 1982 . of health the when to was
 Order to was 1982 in received public Canada she Her the when . of recognized significant health contribution
 Her to health she the of received contribution in . public Canada was when recognized 1982 Order significant
 was to 1982 contribution significant Her . the of when in Canada received Order she health recognized public
 Canada to in health 1982 contribution . public when received Order Her significant was the of she recognized
That is, in fact, what has been done since 1996 under the present system. 
It must be ensured that a conflict of interest of this kind is not permitted at all. 
I will return to this shortly.  
My fourth point concerns investment policy. 
The law should provide that the administrators of the fund are responsible for ensuring contributors a reasonable pension, while providing them with the best return, that is, the safest and best return possible.  
Canada's economy represents about 2.5 per cent of the world economy. 
So it would be wise to permit the fund not only to diversify its investments in stocks and bonds but also to invest worldwide. 
Diversification of values, in a variety of instruments, in various sectors, in different countries and currencies is thus a measure of wisdom and judgement to be left to those in charge, who must, of course, be accountable for their actions.  
Honourable senators, it would be tempting for the administrators to act as investors on occasion by investing in all sorts of businesses with their judgement either arbitrary or verging on patronage. 
We have seen this in Quebec. 
There must be strict rules to prevent this sort of thing, if we want to avoid regrettable misuse.  
The matter of the pension plan's objectives is basic. 
In this respect, the legislation must be clear. 
The board must first and foremost look after the interests of the contributors whose income security depends on its performance to a large extent.  
The history of the Quebec Caisse de dépôt et placement warrants examination in this regard. 
In the mid-1960s, at the time it was set up, Mr. Lesage, the Premier of Quebec at the time, described it as an instrument of social security. 
He added, at the instigation of some, that it would also be an instrument of economic development, with the result that, little by little, the managers who were not sufficiently dynamic in the eyes of the directors were replaced. 
It was not Mr. Caouette's money, it was real bucks. 
The second director was also an experienced investment fund manager, but the government changed in Quebec, and we ended up with people who were more dynamic and who wanted to direct the economy. 
That is when it was decided that the people running the Caisse were not dynamic enough and had to be replaced. 
 Her contribution to public health was recognized in 1982 when she received the Order of Canada .
 in recognized 1982 she was of received Order to health the significant Her public Canada contribution when
 Order health was public significant . she in 1982 received contribution recognized of Canada to when the
 1982 significant health when contribution recognized of the she Canada . to received Order in was Her
Senator Anderson and I were appointed to the Senate in the same class, the Class of September 1995. 
 Anderson Senator . and Class to I of appointed class Senate the same were the , September the in 1995
 appointed in and were to I September Senator the the 1995 class Anderson Class Senate of the same , .
 Class . the Anderson Senate September same the of I in and the , 1995 appointed to class Senator were
 same 1995 appointed Senator I Senate , class . September Anderson of the the in were Class the to and
 to appointed class Senator Anderson Senate . the same September , 1995 in I were Class and the of the
 of Anderson and . in were the class I same , Senate 1995 the September Class to Senator the appointed
 in Senator Anderson , 1995 and Class to of . were Senate appointed class same I the September the the
 Senate in . the same of were Anderson 1995 the September appointed , the I and class to Senator Class
 same Senate and September Class of to Senator the were the 1995 appointed the Anderson . class I , in
 and appointed in Senate I 1995 , same were September Senator of . the Anderson the Class the to class
 the 1995 of . Class the the to Senate Senator appointed I in , same Anderson and class September were
 . the Senate in same Class class the I Anderson of were to the 1995 Senator September appointed and ,
 Senator Anderson the I same of and September , the were 1995 the Senate class Class in . appointed to
 to September of the were 1995 Senate Class same and Senator Anderson in class the , . the appointed I
 . the and the 1995 class of Senator appointed the same , Anderson to in Senate September Class were I
 of . I , Senate appointed 1995 to and Senator Class the the same Anderson in were class the September
There is no doubt about that. 
What you said basically is that it is up to Quebec to address its education problem and decide whether there will be guarantees of denominational education in the schools. 
You say it is a provincial problem. 
In my speech, I have said that there is no guarantee whatsoever that that is what will happen. 
But the right to dissentience that was guaranteed under section 93 of the Constitution will no longer be protected. 
The opinion of the Parti Québécois on this is known, and that is why it is a bit awkward.  
Senator Grafstein :
There are two parts to my honourable friend's question.  
I say, "Yes."  
Once we pass this amendment, it will be for the province of Quebec and those in the Province of Quebec to decide their educational architecture.  
I should like the province of Alberta to do things the way we do them in Ontario. 
Fat chance when it comes to education! 
Honourable senators, I think we have fulfilled our constitutional responsibilities if each senator is individually satisfied that a reasonable test of the majority of the minorities has been achieved. 
Under the evidence presented to us - not outside the room, but before us - that was clear. 
In that respect, I support the report and the resolution.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
It was moved by the Honourable Senator Pépin, seconded by the Honourable Senator Lucier, that this report be adopted.  
Is it your pleasure, honourable senators, to adopt the motion?  
Motion agreed to and report adopted, on division.  
Quebec 
 Senator and I were appointed to the Senate in the same class , the Class of September 1995 .
 the Senate 1995 and I appointed same in Class Anderson Senator the to class September , the were .
 the September same appointed . Senator Senate , were the Class of 1995 Anderson the and in I class
 , . were Senate class of the Anderson the appointed to Senator in Class September I 1995 the same
We were one-half of that class. 
 half - We that one of class . were
 were that We of half - . one class
 class of were one - We half that .
 . We class of - one were half that
 - half class that one of We were .
 class . We of half were - that one
 half We one class of were . that -
 were that We half - of . class one
 of were . class We half - that one
 . - were class We that half of one
 were We one half . of class that -
 were class one We half . - of that
 . We - one of that half were class
 class We that were of half - one .
 were class of half . We that - one
 . that - one half We class of were
Energy-Department of Multiculturalism-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Energy-Department of Natural Resources-Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
Defence-Status of Clothe the Soldier Project 
Defence-Status of the Armoured Personnel Carrier Replacement Program 
Business of the Senate 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
Second Reading-Debate Continued 
Canada Cooperatives Bill 
First Reading 
Criminal Code 
Interpretation Act 
Bill to Amend-Second Reading-Motions in Amendment-Debate Adjourned to Await Ruling of Speaker 
Motion in Sub-Amendment 
Quebec 
Linguistic School Boards-Amendment to Section 93 of Constitution-Report of Special Joint Committee Adopted 
Quebec 
Linguistic School Boards-Motion to Amend Section 93 of Constitution-Debate Adjourned 
Internal Economy, Budgets and Administration 
Sixth Report of Committee Adopted 
Bill to Amend-First Reading 
 We were one - of that class .
 . - one We of half class were
 . that one class We were of -
 . half of - one were class We
Although she had just two years in which to do it, Senator Anderson made her mark here in the Senate. 
 the here which in Senate . it just years had do mark Senator she Anderson her , in two to Although made
 just , . had it Senate two to in her she made mark Although Anderson here do in Senator the which years
 here two . years mark Senate her it do which made to in Although had in she Senator just the , Anderson
 Anderson just her , to had Senator it in years she here Senate the mark . made two Although which do in
 mark do Senator she Senate Anderson it in to just the made her here Although , . years two which had in
 which made just . to in mark Although Anderson her here it years two , Senate the in Senator do had she
 had made two mark Senator do it Senate which in just Although in , here to the years her . Anderson she
 which years the her . here Anderson made do in it , Senate just two Senator Although she to had in mark
 she made in here Senate which do mark years had just two . Although Senator Anderson the to in it , her
 . , years just had Senate the Although which in her she two it in Senator Anderson made do to here mark
 Anderson made she the which in in Senate had years her mark it here Although just to two do Senator , .
 Senator to mark . it her Although years she in had , Anderson in just do the here made two Senate which
 here Anderson to had . her , in just made years Senate two which do it Senator she mark in Although the
 made in which Senator mark . her the years Although do in she two Anderson just Senate had here it , to
 which mark had , her she in . just here Although it years do two made Senator the in Anderson to Senate
 had Anderson Although Senate to . in Senator which just made the , her two it mark do in she here years
What happened in the last recession was a $2 billion surplus in the Employment Insurance Account turned into a $6 billion deficit in two years, and it was necessary to increase premiums by 30% at what was already a difficult time for job creation. 
Consequently, the government believes that it is wise to establish a reserve in the Employment Insurance Account.  
I am assuming that since you have given me this response, that was indeed the strategy on the part of the government.  
I then went on to say: 
If I may, I will quote from The Financial Post of today, November 26, a 1997. 
An editorial entitled "EI surplus is a deficit-reduction tax" states clearly that the EI will result: 
...in an accumulated surplus suspected to top a scandalous $19 billion by the end of 1998. 
If you need $8 billion to look after a recession, using the last recession as the example, what kind of recession are you planning on?  
That is to say, what kind of recession are they planning on in the future with a reserve of $18 billion?  
Provincial finance ministers met in Ottawa. 
I think last night they had dinner with Finance Minister Paul Martin. 
In an article in The Globe and Mail yesterday, it was stated: 
With Ontario's Ernie Eves and B.C.'s Andrew Petter leading the charge, the provincial ministers have made it clear that they consider Mr. Martin's recent $1.4 billion cut to unemployment insurance premiums insufficient...  
The premiers have insisted that they have some input into Ottawa's budget-making and how it allocates the surplus among new spending, tax cuts and debt repayment.  
In a telephone interview on Friday, Mr. Petter said the NDP government in British Columbia wants Ottawa to offset a dramatic increase in Canada Pension Plan premiums with reductions in UI premiums.  
"We're worried about the impact that Canada Pension Plan increases will have in terms of the burden they will impose on business and workers, and the potential they have to reduce job creation by a huge amount if they go ahead without some kind of offsetting relief," Mr. Petter said.  
Ontario's Conservative government is also demanding large cuts to UI premiums, Mr. Eves said in an interview...  
Alberta Treasurer Stockwell Day also indicated last week that he'll be pushing Mr. Martin for tax cuts.  
I predict today that, although this government has managed to get away with things for which our government would have been slaughtered, I think this bill, coupled with what is coming down the track and the changes in OAS and GIS, coupled with the arrogance of the stance taken at Kyoto, this is the kind of arrogance that, inevitably, will be the downfall of this government. 
I predict that that is about to happen.  
 Although she had just two years in which to it , Senator Anderson made her mark here in the Senate .
 Senate , just her mark years do Anderson Although in made . Senator the she which to had here it two
 Senator in years made do here Although . just Senate had to her Anderson which in it two mark , the
 she mark in the her , two had do it in years Anderson Although made just here Senate which . Senator
During her tenure she served on no less than five standing committees at once. 
 standing she at committees on five no than once During tenure . her served less
 at committees she tenure than once During served standing her . no less five on
 five standing less than served her at she committees During . no on tenure once
 on During committees at served less she five than no her standing . once tenure
 During she . at her served tenure no five than standing less on committees once
 at standing on than During five served she no . committees tenure less her once
 at . served on During five than she standing committees once no less tenure her
 she at five During . on served standing than tenure no less once committees her
 . served than at no she committees less tenure on standing During her once five
 her on tenure less standing at than five served once no During . she committees
 no committees tenure than five served During she once less her standing at on .
 committees less tenure she once During than at served on her standing . five no
 less her than at once tenure five served During . committees on standing no she
 than committees at standing no tenure her . During she served on five less once
 . once five served committees on her less standing than During at tenure she no
 once During tenure served at committees no than on . five less she standing her
Does the Honourable Senator Bolduc concur, as Senator Kirby did, that there should be some scrutiny by Senate and House of Commons committees whereby these 12 people who will be sitting on this board will be under a certain amount of scrutiny before they are placed in this lofty, powerful, very responsible position?  
Senator Bolduc :
Honourable senators, that is a very good question. 
There is one thing in the bill that is very acceptable. 
The Auditor General will be able to look at the management of the Investment Board.  
As a result, there will be some accountability in the form of an audit. 
According to Mr. Massé's report, there are 85 to 90 different government organizations. 
This is all very interesting, but none of them will have as much money as the one we are talking about. 
We are talking about an annual amount on the order of 15 per cent to 20 per cent of Canada's gross national product. 
It is an enormous amount. 
I therefore think there has to be some sort of accountability, and one of the ways to achieve that is for parliamentarians to be involved in drafting the Auditor General's report; in my view, there should be an amendment along these lines, to guarantee that that is the case.  
Hon. Jerahmiel S. Grafstein :
Honourable senators, I have a brief question for Senator Bolduc. 
I believe the Caisse de Dépôt is the most powerful pension fund in Canada. 
What accountability does that fund have to the Canadian public?  
Senator Bolduc :
It has not very much accountability to the Canadian public. 
This has been discussed many times in Quebec City and last year, for the first time, they appeared before a parliamentary committee. 
This is a serious matter.  
Senator Grafstein :
 her tenure she served on no less than five standing committees at once .
 at her no committees on During she served than tenure once standing five .
 standing than During tenure committees served less on no . she at her five
 no at standing committees five served less once she During her on . than
She also chaired the Standing Senate Committee on Agriculture and Forestry Subcommittee on the Boreal Forest, and served on the Special Committee of the Senate on the Cape Breton Development Corporation.  
 Senate Senate on Boreal the Committee Corporation and served the Subcommittee , Committee the Special She Standing and Forest Cape on Agriculture also Forestry the on Development Breton the on chaired . of
 Subcommittee on Development the Special and the the Senate She chaired served Committee Committee . and also , on the Corporation Standing on on Forestry of Agriculture Senate Boreal Cape the Forest Breton
 on the Subcommittee . on the of and Committee Boreal Forestry Special on Senate the Cape Corporation Agriculture also , the the Development chaired Committee served Breton and Standing Senate on Forest She
 Boreal Agriculture Senate on on Standing the also the Breton She chaired Committee Forestry on Committee served Senate the and Cape the , the of Special and Development Forest . on Subcommittee Corporation
 on She the on Forestry Forest . Special Committee Subcommittee Cape Standing the of Senate Corporation , served Development also the Committee and the and Breton Agriculture the on on Senate chaired Boreal
 the , and on the of chaired She Committee Senate Forestry Development on the also Cape Special the Agriculture Corporation Standing Committee Subcommittee and Boreal served Senate . Forest on Breton the on
 the on Forestry on Corporation and chaired Committee Standing the , the She Development the Senate on Breton and Boreal Subcommittee of on served Cape . the Agriculture Senate Special Committee Forest also
 Corporation and Forestry the Subcommittee . Agriculture on Boreal Committee also the Special served She Senate on on Breton chaired the the Cape Committee Senate Development Forest of , on and the Standing
 on on and Committee the Breton also the Senate and Corporation Committee Agriculture Forest the . Standing Subcommittee on of on Forestry Development the Senate Cape She Boreal served , the chaired Special
 Special Senate on . and Agriculture Committee the and Standing the Senate Breton the the Forest She the served Development on on Forestry Boreal of Corporation also , chaired on Committee Cape Subcommittee
 also Boreal served She the Senate Standing and Forestry Special the Senate . on the on Agriculture on and Committee Corporation Subcommittee , on chaired the Forest Development Committee the Cape of Breton
 Forest , . and Standing served and chaired the Agriculture Development She on Corporation on on Forestry Senate Special on Committee also Senate Committee Boreal Subcommittee the the Breton Cape of the the
 She Special Cape chaired . Boreal on the on the Corporation also Subcommittee Senate Forest Senate Committee and and on on Agriculture Development Committee Standing the the the , of Forestry Breton served
 Senate the Forest the Committee the Breton Special Agriculture Forestry and chaired Corporation also the on Boreal of on Subcommittee Cape on Development the Standing She Senate served Committee , and . on
 Forestry Boreal Senate on on on Breton and the Committee Cape and Agriculture Subcommittee Corporation served on , the chaired Standing Development Special . the Senate She Forest the also Committee of the
 Development on the chaired served Special Breton Agriculture Corporation of Senate also and the the the Forestry , on Boreal Cape on on Committee She Committee Forest Subcommittee and . Standing the Senate
Hon. Roch Bolduc :
Honourable senators, I will not go back over the very important points raised by my colleague with respect to the intergenerational inequity in this bill. 
I would like to look at other aspects of the problem.  
Honourable senators, the government is proposing to amend the CPP. 
I would have found it appropriate to examine all the major aspects of the plan at this time. 
This has been done for some important facets such as its survival, its management and its performance. 
I will address these shortly.  
This strikes me as an important question. 
Why, for instance, if I do not wish to contribute and prefer to look after my own financial security, should I be obliged by law to participate in the plan, even if I am prepared to sign a document absolving the government of all responsibility on my account? 
Why must everyone belong to a plan whose money will be invested by others, by public servants?  
The government's response to this fundamental question is obligatory collectivization. 
The government seems to assume that Canadians are irresponsible, ignorant, and improvident, and that big brother in Ottawa knows best.  
If he is so competent, what has this big brother been doing for 20 years? 
He agreed to give pension benefits to people, but forgot to levy what he needed to be able to do so, and what he levied, he loaned to the provinces at such low rates that, unless there are drastic changes, the plan will go bankrupt.  
Here we have a classic case of public mismanagement. 
On the one hand, they hand out goodies and, on the other, they forget to charge for them. 
And now they have learned nothing from this sad tale:
Ottawa is asking for even more from everyone and tells us that this time it will invest the money wisely and that it will be for the future good of all.  
Honourable senators, I would much more prefer looking after my own retirement, and I know many Canadians who would like to be free to do what they want with their own money.  
There are many other aspects of this bill that require serious consideration, but I will deal here with only one or two.  
 She also chaired the Standing Senate Committee on Agriculture and Forestry Subcommittee on the Boreal Forest and served on the Special Committee of the Senate on the Cape Breton Development Corporation .
 on Subcommittee of Senate the Breton Boreal Special Committee She the the Senate Forest Committee served Forestry Corporation also and Development chaired on the Cape . the on Standing and Agriculture ,
 Breton Subcommittee Corporation Agriculture the chaired Development Standing , Committee . Cape on Senate the and on served on and Forest Senate the of Committee Special Forestry Boreal also the the She
 , She Boreal . Committee Agriculture Forestry on the Senate chaired Breton Senate on Standing Forest Development on Special also the Corporation Subcommittee served and Committee Cape of the the the on
Senator Anderson's quiet hard work and reliable service to the Senate and to Canada will be missed. 
 Senate to Anderson to hard work will Canada missed and Senator the ' and be quiet reliable . service s
 and s service and work the Anderson to be Senator will hard . reliable Canada missed to ' quiet Senate
 to be . s hard to and will work reliable and Senator missed quiet Anderson ' the service Senate Canada
 work to service hard the . and ' to quiet Senate Anderson Canada s will and be missed Senator reliable
 Anderson . and and work quiet the to missed reliable to Senator s will service hard be Senate Canada '
 and Senator to Senate service quiet s will to and the Anderson reliable be Canada . hard ' work missed
 s Canada Senate Senator Anderson work be and to hard will reliable . to and missed service ' the quiet
 and and Senator service Anderson to quiet s . hard be ' Canada work will Senate reliable missed the to
 Senator reliable . the to be and Senate Anderson hard and s missed will ' work to Canada service quiet
 service Senate the and Senator quiet Canada to ' missed to Anderson will be hard work and s . reliable
 and and Senate reliable Canada the to quiet work service Anderson Senator missed to will s ' hard . be
 service s quiet missed work ' to and . the Senator hard be and will reliable Senate to Canada Anderson
 be hard the Canada Senator to work Senate missed s to service and quiet Anderson reliable . and ' will
 to . Senate to will quiet service Anderson s and and Canada ' missed hard work Senator reliable the be
 Senator Canada hard s the . and to will be service Senate and missed Anderson work to ' quiet reliable
 the and service Canada will Senator to ' work . reliable to quiet hard and missed be Senate Anderson s
I find myself in great difficulty defending Roman Catholic theology let alone letters from Roman Catholic archbishops. 
I will leave it to each senator to come to his or her own conclusion on the testimony and on the letters, which are appended to the report.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Honourable senators, Senator Grafstein is quite right in stating that reform is needed. 
Actually, reform is well under way in Quebec. 
The new system, it seems, will be in place for the next school year. 
New linguistic boards will be set up. 
There will be some difficulties, but, overall, it is proceeding quite well.  
What linkage is there between the new school system in Quebec and the request to exempt Quebec from certain obligations of section 93? 
I do not see any.  
Senator Grafstein :
Honourable senators, there is constitutional law. 
Quebec wants to proceed by the rule of law. 
They are seeking to renovate their system under the rule of law and the Constitution.  
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
That is not my question.  
Senator Grafstein :
I assume that if they choose to proceed, they can. 
However, why should we in the Senate allow any province to proceed in a way that we consider unlawful? 
If there is an amendment to the Constitution, each senator in his or her heart and mind, after reviewing the testimony, must come to a conclusion. 
 Senator Anderson ' s quiet hard work and reliable service to the Senate and to Canada will be missed
 to quiet Senator Anderson . s Senate be missed Canada will hard ' and reliable to work and the
 Senator . s ' to and service Canada hard the work Senate and reliable to Anderson quiet will missed
 hard will and work reliable Anderson ' . service quiet to missed Senator be to Canada s and the
I know that Prince Edward Island will be glad to have her back full time without the Senate to steal her away every week to Ottawa, but I will miss her.  
 Edward her Senate be . to miss know will , Ottawa her full the every have Island that steal away without time to Prince back but I week to glad her will I
 that I every Senate to week Prince know be full her but I back her will the steal , her Edward miss will . to to away Island have glad time without Ottawa
 glad without Senate Edward week will every . Prince back Island away to her the I but that , her know I miss her Ottawa be steal full will have time to to
 miss Senate . will away full glad every steal will to know the Edward to but be her time back I , that her week Island Ottawa to Prince her I have without
 Edward away her her to will Senate to miss I but time Island glad have I steal , be . that week know back will every without the Prince Ottawa her to full
 back the week will to away Island Senate her every miss her her be I to steal know , will that glad but to . Edward Ottawa without time I full have Prince
 the away her to Senate Edward will Island know have week I be to Prince , her Ottawa back to full without but time miss that I her . steal will every glad
 Island her Senate be her will glad steal full time I that the will Ottawa Edward Prince I her . to to , have back away know miss every week without but to
 , to . miss every will Ottawa to be but week her her without time her away Senate Island glad I the full steal that Edward to Prince have I back will know
 , Island have will glad . I be without I miss Ottawa week know the Senate to full her Edward her but will Prince steal back to her away that time every to
 Senate Prince have the know time that Ottawa I be without but Island her to back to , will her week every full . glad miss will her Edward steal I away to
 miss , that her away I Edward Prince her glad every week will without but her Island to back time to have Ottawa full to know . the will steal be Senate I
 every Prince to her but steal week to Senate to miss time Island the I her Edward that know . without full away Ottawa will be her will , have I glad back
 to steal glad full will I be every will miss have I to but without know away that her Ottawa the to time her . back week , her Edward Senate Prince Island
 Ottawa I Prince Senate to to back to time , week the miss away that her have Edward glad every Island be without full but . know steal will will her I her
 have be miss that I her but away . her to week will her time Edward know I glad Senate back without will to , to every full steal the Prince Ottawa Island
They are still talking about it in cabinet. 
Nor did they take any responsibility after their failed strategy in job creation. 
Nor did they take responsibility after almost losing the country in the Quebec referendum. 
"Trust us," they say. 
One thing we can count on is if this government says it is good for Canada, it is not good for Canadians.  
At the time of the 1966 social contract with Canadians, the Liberals were in power. 
They entered into a social contract with their citizens. 
It was they who did it. 
"We will take your money and provide you with a pension," they said. 
As soon as they got their grubby hands on the cash, it was lent to the provinces at favourable interest rates. 
They were cheating Canadians who trusted that when they got old, they would have a pension. 
Baby boomers, who have paid all their working lives since the program's inception, now have the audacity to reach 50. 
We have had the audacity to reach 50!  
Senator Cools :
Not me.  
Senator Tkachuk :
Then they had the gall to limit their breeding, thus causing a situation whereby, 15 years from now, there will be fewer people working to pay for the people who turn 65 at that time. 
They limited their breeding. 
From what we know of social behaviour during the 1970s, abstinence was not the order of the day. 
People were, shall I say, "fuddling". 
 I know that Prince Edward Island will be glad to have her back full time without the Senate to steal her every week to Ottawa , but I will miss her .
 the week back be , miss her I time that Prince her steal full will Island her will know have glad . to Ottawa I Edward but every Senate to away without
 will , steal every be I back that I away Senate full week glad her time to have Island without to her know her will miss . the to Prince Ottawa Edward
 steal to Senate Prince . her I week her that will I time , know Island back the miss will her without Edward to Ottawa be glad have full every away to
Hon. Leonard J. Gustafson :
 . J : Hon Gustafson Leonard .
 J Leonard Gustafson . : . Hon
 Leonard Hon : . Gustafson J .
 : . Leonard Gustafson Hon J .
 Hon Leonard J . Gustafson : .
 : Gustafson Leonard Hon J . .
 Leonard . Gustafson . J : Hon
 : . Gustafson Leonard J . Hon
 Hon . Gustafson : J Leonard .
 Gustafson J Leonard . . : Hon
 . Hon Leonard Gustafson J : .
 . Gustafson Hon : . Leonard J
 . Gustafson : . J Hon Leonard
 Gustafson . Hon Leonard . : J
 J Gustafson Hon Leonard . . :
 . Leonard Gustafson . Hon : J
The Catholics were represented by English-speaking priests.  
Again, in Senator Bolduc's thoughtful speech, he refers to these groups. 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, I regret to interrupt once again. 
The clock now says six o'clock.  
Senator Carstairs :
There is agreement that we will not see the clock, Your Honour.  
Senator Grafstein :
It is not clear to me whether these witnesses represented the entire spectrum of the groups for whom they spoke. 
Having said that, their rights are of concern.  
However, it is clear that denominational teaching will continue inside the province of Quebec by Quebec law.  
It is difficult to see how their accessibility to denominational teaching in the public school system will be abrogated in the short run. 
Obviously, it is no small solace, unlike the case for many years in the province of Ontario, that minority denominational rights, religious education, was achieved, in part, through public funding in the province of Quebec. In other words, as Senator Lavoie-Roux pointed out, in the province of Ontario there is and was no public funding of other religious or denominational schools, unlike Ontario. 
I want to make specific reference to this point because I have some personal experience in this regard. 
Access to public funding in Quebec for denominational education remains available in Quebec. 
I find it hard to believe how the Province of Quebec in the future, even if the notwithstanding clauses are removed, would not continue to fund denominational training. 
Whether it is through a charter school, a public school system, or through a publicly funded private school system, denominational training to all groups, in my view, will continue in the province of Quebec for the foreseeable future.  
Since we are projecting the future, that is my prediction for the future.  
I wish to mention yet another aspect of the testimony referred to in the Reform Party opinion which is appended to the report.  
At the last minute, after all the testimony was taken, the Reform members of the committee introduced a long petition containing thousands of names objecting to the federal resolution. 
 . Leonard J . Gustafson :
 . . J Leonard Hon Gustafson
 J Hon . . Gustafson Leonard
 Hon . : Gustafson Leonard J
Honourable senators, I have a few short words of appreciation for Senator Anderson's contribution, especially to the Standing Senate Committee on Agriculture and Forestry. 
 , especially to short for few of Forestry I appreciation Honourable and have Agriculture Standing the . senators Anderson a words s ' Senate , contribution Senator on Committee
 senators I , ' a . of to Senator contribution Agriculture words Standing especially the , few s Honourable Senate have and Committee Anderson Forestry for on short appreciation
 have contribution Honourable on especially of short few Standing the , ' a Agriculture words senators Senator I , to and . appreciation Forestry Committee Anderson for s Senate
 and I Standing contribution senators . have Anderson s the Forestry Committee few appreciation , Honourable ' words Agriculture a especially Senate of on , for short to Senator
 words appreciation for ' Standing Committee contribution Honourable a Agriculture few Senate senators to especially Anderson the Forestry s . , have and Senator short , of I on
 words for the Forestry short s contribution a Agriculture senators have I Anderson of ' Honourable , on , appreciation and especially Senate Committee to Standing Senator . few
 and contribution appreciation for Standing on have , Honourable Agriculture a of the especially s short , Senate . words to Forestry I few Committee Senator ' senators Anderson
 I short few . to Forestry ' Agriculture have contribution Honourable a words of Senator appreciation , , for Senate the Anderson on s and especially senators Committee Standing
 contribution Standing Senate Agriculture . , to Committee of Senator short the few have ' I , a words Forestry Anderson senators appreciation s especially on for Honourable and
 for , senators Committee the a Agriculture of Honourable ' Senate words on , contribution Senator . have Forestry I Standing Anderson and s appreciation short especially few to
 a words Agriculture Anderson Standing . Senator Committee especially Honourable few for , short have ' of the Forestry senators I s and , to on Senate appreciation contribution
 few Committee ' Senate especially s have on a of senators to . Anderson Standing and contribution , words Agriculture for the , short Senator I appreciation Forestry Honourable
 , words s I short for the Forestry and to a Senator have appreciation senators Committee especially ' Anderson Standing on Honourable Agriculture . contribution Senate , of few
 Honourable the I few for have a short Standing and especially on Anderson , Senate contribution Forestry Agriculture Committee to ' s senators appreciation words , . of Senator
 short have . Committee for ' Senate Senator the senators Agriculture Forestry appreciation to especially of Anderson few words s , I Honourable contribution on a and Standing ,
 Honourable on few senators s Standing Senate , ' Senator contribution for a Forestry Anderson Committee , of short the especially have and appreciation Agriculture I . to words
I do not agree with the concept of my honourable friend's consensus. 
Le Fédération des comités des parents de la province de Québec is a group mandated by the National Assembly to represent all parents and all schools in Quebec. 
They appeared before the committee. 
The president, Mr. Gary Stronach, when asked if the membership was aware, stated - and this is in his letter - that he did not ask his membership for their views. 
He said that he did not ask the parents whether they were for or against the amendment to section 93.  
This is one of the largest groups in Quebec. 
If Mr. Stronach is part of the "for" or "against" theory, then there is a problem with the whole concept put forth by my honourable friend.  
My honourable friend spoke of the Estates General, but he did not refer to their minority report, which covered over 70 per cent of their membership. 
Why are my figures different from those of my honourable friend?  
Senator Grafstein :
Again, honourable senators, this is a question of evidence. 
I refer all senators to the transcript.  
I wish to speak specifically about the fact that we are dealing with elites as opposed to the groups they represent. 
We questioned these representatives during the hearings as to whether their underlying groups agreed with the position they had taken.  
On the Catholic side, we had the position of the archbishops, as limited as it was. 
We had Catholic school boards and Catholic teachers. 
I remember specifically cross-examining Catholic teachers and asking whether they had discussions with students and their parents respecting the changes. 
Their view was that they represented the broad consensus of parents and students as it applied to this amendment. 
All parents wanted a change to renovate the school system, and this was the best modality in which to do that.  
I agree with Senator Lynch-Staunton, Senator Wood and Senator Lavoie-Roux that this is not perfect. 
 Honourable senators , I have a few short words of appreciation for Senator Anderson ' s contribution , especially to the Standing Senate Committee on and Forestry .
 Senate to ' short s Honourable Agriculture Senator a contribution on , the especially have Anderson Committee I , few appreciation words senators and Forestry Standing . for
 Forestry have Agriculture appreciation ' I and s , , words senators contribution Senate of Standing for few Anderson Committee short Senator Honourable to . a on especially
 , Anderson have Standing Senator and the a appreciation . few Senate , words s on Committee contribution Agriculture short Forestry of senators for to Honourable especially I
I was chairman of that committee. 
 that I . was chairman committee of
 committee chairman . of I that was
 of was committee chairman . that I
 I of that was chairman . committee
 . chairman I of was that committee
 I that was chairman of committee .
 I committee chairman that . of was
 I that committee chairman of was .
 . was chairman of that I committee
 of committee I chairman was that .
 chairman committee of . that was I
 committee . that was I of chairman
 I committee was that . chairman of
 was that committee I of . chairman
 committee of chairman was that . I
 chairman was that committee of . I
It must be ensured that a conflict of interest of this kind is not permitted at all. 
I will return to this shortly.  
My fourth point concerns investment policy. 
The law should provide that the administrators of the fund are responsible for ensuring contributors a reasonable pension, while providing them with the best return, that is, the safest and best return possible.  
Canada's economy represents about 2.5 per cent of the world economy. 
So it would be wise to permit the fund not only to diversify its investments in stocks and bonds but also to invest worldwide. 
Diversification of values, in a variety of instruments, in various sectors, in different countries and currencies is thus a measure of wisdom and judgement to be left to those in charge, who must, of course, be accountable for their actions.  
Honourable senators, it would be tempting for the administrators to act as investors on occasion by investing in all sorts of businesses with their judgement either arbitrary or verging on patronage. 
We have seen this in Quebec. 
There must be strict rules to prevent this sort of thing, if we want to avoid regrettable misuse.  
The matter of the pension plan's objectives is basic. 
In this respect, the legislation must be clear. 
The board must first and foremost look after the interests of the contributors whose income security depends on its performance to a large extent.  
The history of the Quebec Caisse de dépôt et placement warrants examination in this regard. 
In the mid-1960s, at the time it was set up, Mr. Lesage, the Premier of Quebec at the time, described it as an instrument of social security. 
He added, at the instigation of some, that it would also be an instrument of economic development, with the result that, little by little, the managers who were not sufficiently dynamic in the eyes of the directors were replaced. 
It was not Mr. Caouette's money, it was real bucks. 
The second director was also an experienced investment fund manager, but the government changed in Quebec, and we ended up with people who were more dynamic and who wanted to direct the economy. 
That is when it was decided that the people running the Caisse were not dynamic enough and had to be replaced. 
That was done. 
 I was of that committee .
 was committee . that of chairman
 was of I that . chairman
 committee I of chairman was that
She was always there. 
 . always there She was
 She . always was there
 . was there always She
 was always there . She
 always there was She .
 . always She was there
 always was . there She
 there was . She always
 was there She . always
 there She always . was
 was . always She there
 always . there She was
 there . always She was
 always She was there .
 there always . She was
 always was She . there
Hon. Mira Spivak :
Honourable senators, on December 1, the federal government proposed that Canada's position at the Kyoto meeting on global climate change would be that developed countries should target 2010 emissions that are 3 per cent below 1990 levels and that Canada should reach the 1990 levels by 2007.  
Given the consultation process preceding Kyoto, could the Leader of the Government tell us which provinces and territories support the position that the federal government is currently advancing in Kyoto, and could he also tell us which ones do not support this position?  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, if I were in Kyoto I would be able to offer Senator Spivak a more definitive answer. 
I know that the Province of Alberta is well represented in Kyoto, as the Honourable Senator Ghitter has alluded to in the past.  
I do not know the positions of the individual provinces. 
Certainly there was an enormous amount of consultation at meetings in various parts of the country prior to the Kyoto conference.  
The meetings of officials have proceeded for several days. 
I understand that meetings of ministers got under way yesterday or the day before and are continuing until tomorrow.  
The Canadian delegation is in the midst of negotiations and is considering the best approach for all of Canada. 
In that context, I am sure all of those present from the provinces are being consulted. 
The negotiations are in a state of flux at the present time and it might be premature for me to speculate on what the outcome might be.  
Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions-Target Year for Implementation of Government Position taken at Kyoto-Government Position 
Hon. Mira Spivak :
I thank the Leader of the Government for his answer. 
I should like to point out that Manitoba is distinct from Alberta, as are all provinces.  
In their December 1 announcement, the government also revealed that not until 1999 would they be able to provide more detail as to the costs and specific actions that would be required to meet our Kyoto commitments. 
Assuming that it will take some time to implement the actions that the government will propose in 1999, it could be the year 2000, 2001, 2002 or 2003 before the government takes steps to meet its Kyoto targets. 
Some of these actions will undoubtedly entail negotiations and agreements with provincial governments, which means it could be as late as 2006 before the government can meet the targets which were set out.  
 She was there .
 She . there was
 She . always was
 was She always .
Her in-depth research of whatever issue, whether in agriculture or forestry, was to be commended.  
 to Her , agriculture depth issue commended - , forestry whether of was or whatever research . in be in
 issue Her or , in agriculture whatever in depth commended forestry . be - was to research of , whether
 be , was depth in in commended Her issue or whether to agriculture research , - of . forestry whatever
 or agriculture , was Her be in depth forestry commended in issue to research - , . of whatever whether
 be was or . agriculture Her depth research issue in of whether - whatever forestry to in commended , ,
 Her of - depth , be research issue in was commended whatever or , . agriculture whether to in forestry
 be forestry of depth . commended Her in research issue , or , agriculture was whether whatever to in -
 , issue to depth was whether forestry in - research , whatever Her . be of in or agriculture commended
 research forestry was agriculture . whatever to , , Her or depth issue of in whether be - in commended
 - Her research in , be or , . was whether in depth forestry commended whatever agriculture issue to of
 , to depth of was - be , in in research Her commended agriculture issue . or whether whatever forestry
 forestry in or research , , in whether depth of agriculture be whatever to - issue commended . was Her
 , research Her agriculture forestry in depth or - . to be whatever commended issue was , in of whether
 in , issue , Her be of was research whatever depth - to . forestry or whether in commended agriculture
 or . research commended Her be - in whatever of depth issue to in , whether forestry agriculture was ,
 was - issue of be depth , to research in . , Her agriculture forestry whatever whether commended in or
They argued that the routine publication of quarterly results could tend to draw attention away from the longer-term investment objectives of the Board. 
Other large pension funds like the Ontario Municipal Employees Retirement System and the Ontario Teachers Pension Plan do not publish their quarterly results for these reasons. 
For a pension fund, long-term investment performance is paramount.  
Changes to Canada Pension Plan-Investment Board Not Subject to Access to Information Act-Government Position 
(Response to question raised by Donald H. Oliver on November 19, 1997) 
Applying the Access to Information Act to the CPP Investment Board would be inappropriate.  
The Board's mandate is to invest CPP funds at arm's length from governments in the best interest of plan members. 
As an investment institution, much of its day-to-day activities will be commercially sensitive and would be exempt under ATI in any event.  
While ATI does not apply to the CPP Investment Board, by legislation and regulations the Board's operations will be very transparent and it will be subject to close public scrutiny.  
For example, the Board will be required to: 
- make public its investment policies, code of conduct, corporate governance practices, proxy voting guidelines, and by-laws 
- disclose the compensation of the five most highly compensated officers of the Board 
- prepare quarterly financial statements that will be sent to federal and provincial Finance Ministers, and an annual report that will be tabled in Parliament 
- hold regular public meetings in each participating province to allow for public discussion and input 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
Commemoration of Fiftieth Anniversary-Plans of Government 
(Response to question raised by Hon. Noël A. Kinsella on October 23, 1997) 
The 50th Anniversary provides Canadians an opportunity to reflect on the importance of human rights in the life of the country, as they are a fundamental unifying value and an important part of our legacy to future generations.  
The objectives of the commemoration are to promote respect for human rights and responsibilities; mark Canada's national and international progress in implementing human rights standards; develop innovative and responsive approaches to emerging human rights issues; and, to link values highly esteemed by Canadians - values such as respect for the rule of law, dignity of the person, fairness, equitable treatment and democratic participation - to a broader government agenda related to social cohesion and social justice.  
Activities planned around December 10, 1997 for the launch of the 50th Anniversary commemorative year of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) 
 Her in - depth research of whatever issue , whether in agriculture or forestry , was to commended .
 or forestry , - whatever to in in commended issue of agriculture . be whether research was , Her
 to , of whatever . or in , forestry research issue in Her whether be depth - commended was
 issue forestry , Her research was agriculture whatever , whether be or in in commended . depth to of
I take this occasion to say, "Thank you, Senator Anderson" for your contribution to that committee and to the Senate. 
 , the your committee this you to Senator to say to occasion " I , for and Anderson contribution Thank Senate that " . take
 say to your the you I contribution and Senate Senator committee that " to , take to " this Thank . occasion , Anderson for
 , take , and the this Thank your say . that " to occasion to Anderson for contribution you I committee Senate to " Senator
 take Thank to Senator and , . for your committee the Anderson contribution , this " I Senate that occasion you to say to "
 that for contribution occasion to to Thank , and " committee Senator " this take Anderson Senate say , you your . I to the
 and " you Thank Senator take say occasion this to committee that your , Senate I . the , for to Anderson contribution " to
 the . that " say " this to Senator Thank you and take to Senate to committee , for I Anderson your occasion contribution ,
 and Anderson I the " . Senator to contribution take committee your Senate for , you to that Thank , occasion to say this "
 occasion to . that take say , contribution and your you to " the this for Senate Senator " Thank , committee Anderson to I
 " Anderson this the you say , take and to that . committee , Senator to contribution " Thank to I your Senate occasion for
 to " Thank and " to Senate say Anderson occasion take your . to , contribution the this that Senator committee you , I for
 this , Anderson your committee you " contribution . and I " Senator , take Thank to the to say occasion for Senate to that
 for . this your committee the Senate that Senator to Thank , to take say , " I contribution occasion to Anderson " you and
 Senate take your and , to for Thank Senator to Anderson occasion say that committee I this , . " contribution to the you "
 " I to " Anderson Senator for take to and , to contribution the you occasion committee that . say this your Thank , Senate
 your " take " to I Senate for to to the . say Thank Anderson occasion , contribution and you that committee this Senator ,
Look at the performance of crown corporations. 
Air Canada, CN and Canadair all did well after being privatized. 
In other words, good management started once the government was no longer involved.  
So, we should be cautious before giving the public sector increased responsibilities for the management of funds. 
We must be careful before transferring money from the private to the public sector.  
Let us now look at the impact of the plan on jobs.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Your 15 minutes are up. 
Is leave granted to continue, honourable senators?  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
Senator Bolduc :
Honourable senators, clearly, we will be increasing the cost of jobs for businesses, and the cost of work for individuals. 
How can another payroll tax be positive for the creation of jobs? 
I would like an answer to this good question.  
Another question concerns the interprovincial competition that can be expected. 
It is obvious that the provinces which used to benefit from preferential rates from the federal fund will pay the going price in future. 
They will borrow, but at a higher rate. 
The increase in debt servicing costs will inflate each province's budget.  
As far as business investment is concerned, will the populations of the provinces agree to have their savings used for businesses in other provinces at the expense of their own? 
 I take this occasion to say , " Thank you , Senator Anderson " for your contribution to that committee and to the .
 " this for Thank and that take the to I Anderson committee occasion you your to " to Senate contribution , . , say
 to Senator , " this your the , Thank take that " Anderson for to to committee . and contribution occasion say I you
 and you for Thank " Anderson occasion contribution the this to I say to your , , that Senate take . " to committee
I will miss you.  
 . I miss will you
 . will you I miss
 I you will miss .
 will you I miss .
 will miss . I you
 you I miss . will
 will miss you I .
 . will you miss I
 will you miss . I
 will I you . miss
 miss I you . will
 will you miss I .
 . I will miss you
 you will I . miss
 will you . miss I
 will miss I you .
You cannot have high EI premiums or high taxation through high EI premiums to pay your deficit down; then jack up your rates on the Canada Pension Plan; and then modify the OAS and GIS such that people receive reduced payouts, because you are hitting the same generation. 
You have bought off the seniors, and you are hitting the kids. 
They will not forget that.  
On October 30, Senator Tkachuk asked the following: 
Why is the government trying to fix the CPP by hitting hardest those least able to afford it?...  
Could the Leader of the Government in the Senate prevail upon his colleague the Minister of Finance to have his officials produce information showing the impact of the freeze in the earnings exemption for different ranges of income?  
For example, could data be prepared showing how much the freeze will benefit the government from those earning income below the poverty line relative to their family income, and how much it will save those with incomes above the poverty line relative to their total income?  
In other words, it is and will be perceived as another tax.  
On November 5, Senator Oliver said: 
They are increasing it by one month per year to give people time to adjust to the new reality of that retirement age. 
In effect, that will keep things in relative control.  
It should have been explained to Canadians that the government explored that method and rejected it for specific reasons. 
As others have said before me, people are living longer. 
While the age of 65 was formerly not achieved by many, it is being achieved by most today. 
That should be taken into consideration as a basis for increasing the age for retirement because it will decrease the burden on the young people who today believe that they will have to pay the whole shot for us.  
Senator Oliver continued: 
Honourable senators, in these times of slowing real incomes, increasing long-term interest rates, high personal taxes, increased CPP premiums, and ridiculously high EI premiums, where does the Leader of the Government believe that Canadians, who will receive less money from public plans, will find money to put away in their RRSPs to secure their own retirements?  
On November 6, Senator Oliver asked: 
Honourable senators, in 1995, the Department of Finance conducted a study on the impact of the increase in CPP premiums between 1986 and 1995. 
During that period, employee contributions rose from 1.85 per cent to 2.25 per cent of earnings, and the combined rate rose from 3.6 to 5 per cent.  
 will miss you .
 I you . will
 miss will I .
 I will you .
The Honourable Joseph P. Landry 
 Honourable The P Joseph Landry .
 Landry P Honourable . Joseph The
 The Honourable . Landry Joseph P
 Honourable The P Landry Joseph .
 P . Joseph Honourable The Landry
 . The P Honourable Landry Joseph
 Honourable Landry . Joseph P The
 Joseph Honourable The Landry . P
 Joseph . P The Honourable Landry
 Joseph Honourable P The Landry .
 Landry Joseph P . The Honourable
 Landry The P . Honourable Joseph
 Landry P Joseph . The Honourable
 . Honourable Joseph P Landry The
 Joseph Honourable . P The Landry
 Honourable P . The Landry Joseph
Hon. Sharon Carstairs (Deputy Leader of the Government) table the answer to Question No. 61 on the Order Paper-by Senator Forrestall.  
Business of the Senate 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, before I call Orders of the Day, I wish to remind honourable senators that we will be taking the official photograph of the Senate tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
Canada Pension Plan Investment Board Bill 
Second Reading-Debate Continued 
On the Order: 
Resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Kirby, seconded by the Honourable Senator Joyal, P.C., for the second reading of Bill C-2, to establish the Canada Pension Plan Investment Board and to amend the Canada Pension Plan and the Old Age Security Act and to make consequential amendments to other Acts.  
Hon. David Tkachuk :
However, there are a number of important issues that we believe are relevant and important not only to this side of the house but to all senators. 
Some senators, including me, are interested in this bill from a personal point of view as well. 
This bill was brought in last week so that we could work on it. 
Now, we must complete that work and pass the bill by Christmas. 
I do not think that we are handmaidens. 
We do not have to take orders. 
We must do what is right.  
This bill has important consequences for many of us, and more particularly, for our children and our grandchildren. 
Those people who are already retired and at the age of 65 will receive all their benefits. 
For those people who are in the middle and who will soon be retiring, it is not a big problem for them. 
 The Honourable Joseph P Landry
 P Landry The Honourable Joseph
 Landry Joseph P . The
 P Landry Honourable . Joseph
Tributes on Retirement 
 Retirement on Tributes
 Tributes Retirement on
 Tributes Retirement on
 Retirement Tributes on
 Tributes on Retirement
 Retirement Tributes on
 Retirement on Tributes
 on Tributes Retirement
 Retirement Tributes on
 on Tributes Retirement
 Tributes on Retirement
 on Retirement Tributes
 Tributes on Retirement
 Tributes on Retirement
 on Retirement Tributes
 Retirement on Tributes
While numerically they may not be impressive to others, surely they must be to the Parliament of Canada, the guardian of minority rights. 
Surely, the Parliament of Canada cannot subscribe to the notion that the rights of minorities can be altered, much less obliterated, by a decision of a majority when, at best, that majority may have a detached interest in the concerns and preoccupations of the minority.  
Some assurances may be found in a statement made by the Quebec Department of Education in a advertising supplement which appeared in The Gazette of Montreal on November 29. 
It is headed: "Confessional Schools and Services." 
I will read the two pertinent paragraphs. 
This is the official Quebec policy, from the Department of Education, on confessional schools and services under the new linguistic board system. 
It states: 
The change from religion-based to language-based school boards does not mean that all Québec schools will become secular. 
Each institution will have the option of maintaining or reviewing its current status as a Catholic or Protestant school. 
Students will continue to take religion courses or to receive pastoral animation or religious care and guidance services if they so desire.  
Before the end of the third year after the linguistic school boards are in place, the schools will be asked to consult the parents and decide whether or not they wish to maintain their confessional status.  
Those unfamiliar with Catholic and Protestant school boards in Montreal and Quebec City should know that in many cases, particularly in the Protestant system, it is the language of instruction which predominates. 
Many schools have little, if any, religious content, while in others it is very strong. 
Parents already have a say in how much religion they want their children exposed to and that will continue under the new system.  
While section 93 guarantees are only a matter of religious denominations, the essential characteristics of the resulting Quebec school system have, nonetheless, been linguistic. 
One does not speak often of going to a Catholic or Protestant school any more. 
One usually speaks of going to a French or an English school. 
It was inevitable, then, that the committee would be drawn into a debate on how the amendment of section 93 might affect linguistic rights, particularly those claimed by the minority.  
While section 23 of the Charter establishes minority linguistic education rights, Quebec is not bound by all its provisions and so has adopted legislation in this field which, in effect, creates two classes of English-speaking Quebecers as it distinguishes between those educated in Canada and those educated elsewhere. 
Only those parents educated in English in Canada can pass on the benefit of minority English language education to their children. 
 on Retirement
 Retirement Tributes
 Retirement Tributes
 on Tributes
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
 Leader B : ( Government of Graham . the ) Alasdair . Hon
 Government : ( ) Graham Alasdair B Leader . of . Hon the
 B Graham . : . Government Leader Alasdair ( of Hon ) the
 B Alasdair of Government the . ) Leader Graham ( . Hon :
 Alasdair B Government : Hon ) Leader ( . Graham . of the
 Government . Graham ( Alasdair ) : . Leader Hon the of B
 : Graham Hon Alasdair Leader of ( ) . Government the B .
 B of ) the Hon : ( Leader Graham Alasdair . Government .
 . ( Government . ) B of Alasdair Hon Graham : the Leader
 Government Hon ) of Alasdair Leader B the : . ( Graham .
 Government : . Hon Leader the of Alasdair . Graham ( B )
 Hon Government of . . ( Leader B the : Alasdair Graham )
 ) Government : B Alasdair . Hon . Graham of ( the Leader
 the Hon Leader . Alasdair Government ( Graham ) of B . :
 Hon Government ) . Graham B of Alasdair Leader the . : (
 . Alasdair ) Hon Graham ( of B Government Leader the : .
Senator Bolduc :
It has not very much accountability to the Canadian public. 
This has been discussed many times in Quebec City and last year, for the first time, they appeared before a parliamentary committee. 
This is a serious matter.  
Senator Grafstein :
Honourable senators, I do not question the issue of accountability. 
The problem is whether one would be able to obtain the very best people by the public process, the newspaper process or the media process, or whether the accountability process is better when governments, which are indirectly accountable, make those appointments and those nominated are then accountable to a parliamentary committee.  
Senator Bolduc :
When you talk about "accountability," I would suggest that that is second best. 
It is not a perfect situation, although you will have a parliamentary committee taking some responsibility. 
It is better than nothing but, in my opinion, it is second best.  
I am fairly sure that, in one way, the pure accountability we are talking about is quasi-impossible. 
Have different people manage different funds so that we will have some evaluation, some comparison and some diversification.  
Hon. Michael A. Meighen :
Honourable senators, this is precisely where I wanted clarification. 
Are you recommending that the fund be divided into four $25-billion portions and that so many firms administer each $25-billion portion in its entirety? 
Or are you recommending that one firm be responsible for one sector, such as the real estate sector and another firm be responsible for another sector?  
Senator Bolduc :
Honourable senators, in my opinion, it could be by sector, but my preference would be for the total to be broken down into four portions covering a variety of investments. 
Otherwise, if you have a block of $25 or $30 billion in real estate, you know what that means. 
 Hon . B . Graham ( Leader of the Government ) :
 : Hon ) ( Alasdair of B . Graham the . Leader
 the Graham Alasdair : ( of Leader Government . . ) B
 Leader the ( Graham Hon of . . Alasdair Government : )
Honourable senators, in turning my mind to speaking of Senator Joe Landry, I cannot help but think of his roots in the dozens of small coastal communities which dot the great Atlantic seaboard and of the proud traditions and lifestyles which have been passed on from generation to generation.  
 cannot of senators but the think seaboard passed , his speaking of small , dot proud Atlantic turning Honourable to and . which Senator my Joe communities coastal mind the great generation of which of Landry on lifestyles roots in been I traditions have from help generation to in the and dozens
 my but traditions to . of think which his and , have speaking the small lifestyles proud of passed roots in Landry the I which Atlantic Senator generation great dot seaboard the generation senators mind help in coastal turning on communities dozens of and , of been to from Honourable Joe cannot
 proud Honourable turning lifestyles traditions generation from dot but communities coastal of generation of mind , . which been cannot of have my senators seaboard the I of Senator in to and speaking the which on Landry and roots his , help Atlantic to in small great passed the Joe dozens think
 have Joe , I . in small Landry coastal of to generation in dot of been which , help the passed to great of proud which cannot think his traditions speaking mind on the Atlantic but and senators turning and Senator communities my the seaboard lifestyles from of generation dozens roots Honourable
 Joe his but the which in in my Senator traditions communities great , which to Honourable of coastal and cannot I to dozens proud the dot passed of seaboard think of been small . generation on roots , have from help Atlantic Landry senators and speaking turning of generation mind lifestyles the
 mind lifestyles Honourable coastal help of from proud I but in Atlantic the to seaboard have communities his small my , the . generation turning passed Landry in speaking the of to and which Senator which dot think senators cannot , great of and roots Joe been of traditions on dozens generation
 from turning of help to which the dot proud roots to senators which Landry communities of I in think speaking seaboard mind and but , Atlantic my great Joe lifestyles in coastal the of traditions dozens cannot of on generation his small been . generation Honourable Senator and the passed , have
 I of passed from in in . dot my his turning speaking to , of the roots the have on traditions seaboard small Joe Honourable help think of coastal to great and but senators the Atlantic proud Landry which generation communities been of cannot dozens lifestyles generation and which , mind Senator
 . in dozens help Honourable but his and think from generation I of proud communities on seaboard great have senators generation dot , mind roots traditions to speaking which Senator to the been of coastal turning of lifestyles and small the the which passed Landry Atlantic , of Joe cannot my in
 traditions senators which and in Joe of generation . on dozens think lifestyles which turning and dot coastal seaboard the his , mind roots speaking passed proud I cannot help generation Senator my but , from to Atlantic the the have of of to in been communities Landry of great Honourable small
 been coastal to which have his seaboard Atlantic and in senators in Honourable generation roots passed think , dot the turning . of help lifestyles speaking communities generation mind great to small traditions the Senator Joe cannot I and proud , but dozens on of of of which Landry the from my
 lifestyles of senators the great proud Honourable generation dot generation coastal Joe Senator Atlantic of on of the , roots from passed dozens think small seaboard to and which and help been communities to mind in his Landry have turning but cannot traditions , the my . in of I speaking which
 think seaboard from have generation coastal Landry communities generation I , passed of traditions on in which of his Senator senators roots the mind been the cannot Joe to Honourable but to and in lifestyles dozens which of great proud Atlantic my , speaking small turning and help dot the of .
 I to but turning seaboard of passed which which lifestyles senators of communities think Senator traditions of , coastal proud in and from help great and generation the . in the small speaking mind the have of Joe to generation Atlantic dot been cannot dozens Landry his roots on , my Honourable
 my to roots I generation coastal dot Atlantic the but help Honourable passed dozens Landry small senators great the and Senator cannot in Joe , to been , lifestyles turning seaboard proud his of and . think speaking from the generation communities mind have which of in of on of traditions which
 Honourable proud , of seaboard of of communities which small the his . passed I generation been to cannot dozens generation from turning of and Joe coastal great to Senator roots in lifestyles help speaking the senators my dot traditions Atlantic think mind but and which Landry , have in the on
While the age of 65 was formerly not achieved by many, it is being achieved by most today. 
That should be taken into consideration as a basis for increasing the age for retirement because it will decrease the burden on the young people who today believe that they will have to pay the whole shot for us.  
Senator Oliver continued: 
Honourable senators, in these times of slowing real incomes, increasing long-term interest rates, high personal taxes, increased CPP premiums, and ridiculously high EI premiums, where does the Leader of the Government believe that Canadians, who will receive less money from public plans, will find money to put away in their RRSPs to secure their own retirements?  
On November 6, Senator Oliver asked: 
Honourable senators, in 1995, the Department of Finance conducted a study on the impact of the increase in CPP premiums between 1986 and 1995. 
During that period, employee contributions rose from 1.85 per cent to 2.25 per cent of earnings, and the combined rate rose from 3.6 to 5 per cent.  
How many Canadians must pay the price for the planned increase in premiums?  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, I regret to interrupt the honourable senator, but his allotted time has expired.  
Senator Stratton :
I would like to finish my speech, if I may.  
The Hon. the Speaker :
Is leave granted for Honourable Senator Stratton to continue?  
Hon. Senators :
Agreed.  
Senator Stratton :
Thank you, senators.  
In the Financial Post or The Globe and Mail it was recently explained that, as employers will have to pay higher CPP premiums and as most employers or companies have a limited budget for wages, they will have to pass on the cost to people through the price of their product, or they will have to lay people off, or they will have to go to contract workers.  
The concern is the long-term effect this huge increase will have on full-time jobs.  
 Honourable senators , in turning my mind to speaking of Senator Joe Landry , I cannot but think of his roots in the dozens of small coastal communities which dot the great Atlantic seaboard and of the proud traditions and lifestyles which have been passed on from generation to generation .
 I , the the generation his help the coastal dozens and which cannot mind on of turning think of Senator Honourable to . communities small passed speaking , great but dot traditions to in which generation and roots lifestyles been Joe seaboard of my from proud Landry in have senators of
 speaking Honourable , communities generation in of my roots seaboard I . which have dot help passed and senators to lifestyles been the from , in which Landry his turning of traditions Senator coastal think on the Joe the of of generation small but and mind proud Atlantic cannot to great
 lifestyles generation proud his but of cannot the the communities dot , have seaboard the Senator of passed to small of in traditions on turning Landry I Joe and been mind senators help . which generation of roots , speaking great and in Honourable think my which to Atlantic coastal dozens
In my part of the world, community is our greatest natural resource. 
 is world our In greatest community resource my of natural , . the part
 resource of . natural my our the In greatest part , world community is
 In part the our is . community , greatest world my natural of resource
 of world natural greatest , the is my resource . part In our community
 the , resource greatest natural In my . is world our community part of
 , is . greatest my of natural world part our community In resource the
 greatest the In is world resource our , part my of community natural .
 community natural , greatest resource the part world In is my of our .
 is my world , resource natural . the community our of greatest In part
 the community . part greatest In my resource of world our , is natural
 world of natural greatest In , our community my part the . resource is
 natural greatest , world my the part of . In is community our resource
 my of our greatest is community natural . , resource part the In world
 greatest is our world , In of . natural my resource part the community
 greatest , natural . of In part our world is community resource my the
 community is natural my In greatest world the resource , . of part our
Senator Comeau :
I might advise the minister that indeed there is a 49-per-cent limit on foreign ownership of licences. 
Unfortunately, almost nothing has been said by the negotiators as to how they will handle these extremely important issues that impact on all the coastal communities of Canada.  
As a supplementary, would the minister also advise whether the government negotiators have been consulting with the fishing industry on this subject? 
If so, what has been the government's position in relation to the fishing industry?  
Senator Graham :
The answer, honourable senators, is that they have been consulting with the fishing industry. 
I believe the position of the industry is exactly as suggested by my honourable friend. 
That is something else that I will have clarified for him.  
National Defence 
Search and Rescue Helicopter Replacement Program-Possible Cabinet Discussion on Awarding Contract for Helicopter Purchase-Government Position 
Hon. J. Michael Forrestall :
Honourable senators, did the cabinet consider the awarding of a contract for new search and rescue helicopters this morning? 
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, my honourable friend would be the first to recognize that it is not appropriate for me to comment on any discussions that took place in cabinet this morning. 
Hon. Lowell Murray :
Would it be appropriate for the honourable minister to let us know whether it was considered last week?  
Senator Graham :
The matter of the helicopters is under active consideration by the government.  
Cabinet met last Thursday. 
 In my part of the , community is our greatest natural resource .
 resource is our greatest community of world . my , part In natural
 our world part community my of is , the greatest natural In .
 my natural the is part In community greatest of our , . world
It is in our communities where the values which anchor our country are renewed across the decades. 
 the where communities decades values in are renewed country which our is across . anchor our It the
 our is values the anchor country . where across our the decades which It are renewed communities in
 in where renewed . across are anchor It the our decades country which communities our is values the
 communities which anchor country our It values is in where across renewed our . are the decades the
 across our are where the values in . renewed communities which the anchor is country It our decades
 are in is anchor our which values country the where the our It across renewed . decades communities
 the our decades where values is . across in country communities are It the anchor which renewed our
 our It across renewed in is anchor communities are . values which where our the the decades country
 values is the renewed where across anchor which country the our communities It are decades . in our
 decades across communities are anchor our which . where renewed is the It our country the in values
 where are . the values the decades across is our in anchor our renewed country communities It which
 the where which . in our are renewed values decades country the across communities is It anchor our
 are our the in anchor where decades is renewed communities the values . which our across It country
 decades communities which in our across our renewed the country . where values anchor is It are the
 our values our the are It the in across anchor country is communities where renewed which decades .
 . where country renewed across is in our values our are which communities anchor It decades the the
However, there again, that is merely my interpretation.  
I emphasize again that Mr. Boyle had the right to his life. 
He had the right to have a vehicle and operate it, and he had the right to have money in his possession. 
All those were taken away from him, and all the Supreme Court of Canada could think of was that piece of paper called a "warrant" and to criticize the police for not having such a document.  
I wanted to suggest that perhaps criminals should apply for a warrant before they commit murder, but I do not want to pursue that because I am afraid that some Charter judge will give them a warrant or a licence to do so. 
Fifteen years ago, I would have been shocked at criticism of a decision rendered by the Supreme Court; but, today that is commonplace. 
When a major decision comes down from the Supreme Court, the media is there to interview people who wish to comment, mostly negatively, on the decision. 
As I stated, we would not have seen a headline like that 15 years ago.  
That is their function, and Parliament has referred it to them. 
However, the enactment of laws remains the function of Parliament. 
It is not the function of the Supreme Court of Canada or any other court to make laws.  
Honourable senators, I read in today's paper where the families of the Leslie Mahaffy and Kristen French, both of whom were killed by Paul Bernardo, are appealing to the judge to make a law prohibiting evidence of that type being heard by the public in court. 
The interesting point is that they are asking the judge to make the law; they are not asking Parliament. 
Parliament is the highest court in the land and that must always be so. 
It would be most unusual to have a lower court issue a directive to a higher court.  
Honourable senators, I commend Senator Cools for all the work and research she has done. 
Many aspects of her amendment are worthwhile considering. 
However, I feel she has omitted to take into consideration one aspect of our legislation.  
Any law passed by Parliament does not become law until it receives Royal Assent, and having the Supreme Court direct Parliament to pass a law by December 19, 1997 takes away the prerogative of the sovereign. 
That is why we have Royal Assent. 
 It is in our communities where the values which our country are renewed across the decades .
 our anchor It in . is country the where which renewed decades the values communities are our
 renewed which country the across are our . It where the our in values anchor decades communities
 the renewed our the values across in communities are decades is where It anchor which . our
The deep roots of community have been in many ways the origins of our wonderful country. 
 been many The roots the . of of ways have our wonderful origins deep in community country
 country our community ways wonderful the many been origins in roots deep of of . have The
 been the many of origins community of have ways our . deep wonderful in country The roots
 ways community roots wonderful in origins . of country many The of been our the deep have
 many . deep of our origins have in roots The the ways of been wonderful country community
 many country been wonderful origins of the roots ways have deep community in The our of .
 wonderful deep . of origins community the been The roots our in have many of ways country
 many in of the origins country roots community of been deep wonderful The have ways our .
 been of many wonderful community of The in country have deep roots . our origins ways the
 have community ways been deep country our . The origins of the of wonderful in roots many
 . have community wonderful ways our origins been of roots The country of the in many deep
 of have of in community ways . our roots many been the wonderful country The origins deep
 roots been many ways The . of country in community of deep wonderful the have origins our
 the country roots of wonderful been deep community in origins many of ways . The have our
 in wonderful been of country community our origins the many The have of deep ways . roots
 of community the of deep roots been . country origins The our in many ways have wonderful
Quebec, however, points out that to have multiple school systems can only lead to overlapping, duplication, and confusion, with all their attendant additional costs.  
In addition, religious education as provided for in section 93 is reconfirmed in the province's Education Act, which by itself may be reassuring at first glance, but not in reality as it is a protection which is simply not as iron-clad as a constitutional guarantee.  
When the Education Act, Bill 107, was passed in 1994, the National Assembly agreed to apply the notwithstanding clause so that the privileges given to denominations in section 93 could not be successfully challenged under the Charter. 
Notwithstanding clauses expire every five years and this one is up in 1999. Will it be re-enacted? 
The Parti Québécois, in opposition, voted against it at the time. 
The two ministers who appeared before the joint committee would not reveal their party's position, preferring to await a broad consultation before stating it. 
An uninformed guess, however, leads me to believe that, if the Parti Québécois still forms the government two years hence, the notwithstanding clause will not be renewed, thereby leading to the gradual removal of Catholic and Protestant teaching in public schools as we know it today.  
In rebuttal to this, many will point to a letter sent to the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs by the Bishop of Baie-Comeau on behalf of the Assembly of Quebec Bishops. 
It is dated September 30, 1997, and appears as Appendix H in the joint committee report. 
In it, Bishop Morissette repeats the assembly's approval for the establishment of linguistic school boards, but he also adds an important caveat which was only given passing mention in the report itself. 
The letter states: 
Our approval for changing the status of school boards has always been accompanied by one condition: that the denominational guarantees established in Bill 107 be maintained.  
The Anglican Bishop of Montreal, in a letter dated November 3, 1997, to the same minister, and included in the report as Appendix I, wrote as follows: 
...we...favour the creation of linguistic school boards and the establishment of a non-denominational educational system which respects the choice of parents to require that their children receive religious and moral education in conformity with their beliefs.  
We cannot afford to ignore these views, particularly as they coincide with those of many, parents in particular, who testified before the committee. 
Linguistic schools are quite acceptable, we heard repeatedly, as long as the present religious component is maintained.  
Franco-Protestants and English Catholics were particularly concerned. 
While numerically they may not be impressive to others, surely they must be to the Parliament of Canada, the guardian of minority rights. 
Surely, the Parliament of Canada cannot subscribe to the notion that the rights of minorities can be altered, much less obliterated, by a decision of a majority when, at best, that majority may have a detached interest in the concerns and preoccupations of the minority.  
Some assurances may be found in a statement made by the Quebec Department of Education in a advertising supplement which appeared in The Gazette of Montreal on November 29. 
 The deep roots of community have been in ways the origins of our wonderful country .
 been The of our deep in ways of many the wonderful community country roots have origins
 origins deep country in the ways been roots of wonderful . many of our The have
 been wonderful deep of ways the in roots of many community country our The . origins
It is in the small communities like Cap-Pelé, New Brunswick, where Senator Joe Landry came from, where lifestyles based on self-reliance and individual responsibility have been shaped and passed on over time.  
 where shaped Landry on the Senator Pelé , Joe , from on have in based over reliance Brunswick been responsibility It time communities - like passed Cap where came , and self individual . is and small New lifestyles -
 and have based on responsibility - small the lifestyles It New where came been reliance Senator communities and Pelé in where Joe self Cap time , , , individual Brunswick shaped is passed like from on Landry over - .
 based on came is reliance over individual time responsibility Landry New where where small It Pelé passed Brunswick been shaped like , in communities lifestyles . , Senator - self and - Cap Joe and have the , on from
 is Senator have , like . over based reliance on where responsibility on small It - from the Joe and communities where came passed Cap shaped New , , in time self been Landry Brunswick and individual - Pelé lifestyles
 Senator from . and on responsibility based Brunswick over like small It New is shaped time - have passed individual been , communities - self reliance and lifestyles , on Cap Joe Pelé where where the in Landry came ,
 responsibility , in shaped It have . based Landry - Senator Pelé on lifestyles - where where , came Brunswick , time is reliance on the Cap self from like over and small New communities Joe and individual passed been
 , passed Joe and is Senator lifestyles reliance where self and - . been Landry in - communities time individual , like on responsibility have where based came small Brunswick over Pelé New the from shaped , Cap on It
 responsibility on the passed Senator Brunswick on . been , - Cap Pelé Joe New small , and lifestyles - like in and communities shaped time Landry reliance where is individual from self , over It based came have where
 Brunswick . New - Senator It and came based on Landry over like have shaped small , communities self the individual is where from Joe been - , time on Pelé Cap and lifestyles responsibility passed , where in reliance
 on communities on and New , It small shaped reliance based where , where - is passed lifestyles . Cap Pelé from Senator Joe have the , - came Brunswick and individual over time Landry in like responsibility been self
 from lifestyles the Brunswick is where time , on , based where in - and New small have Joe , It communities . and came like Cap reliance - on shaped passed Senator been over Pelé individual Landry responsibility self
 on lifestyles small , Cap from Landry is shaped came based responsibility been Joe New . in individual where It - communities Senator Pelé have the - like reliance over self Brunswick and and , time on , passed where
 like Landry lifestyles on Joe is from in - self , small communities based It , New . where on , and where Pelé Brunswick time shaped Cap passed responsibility - came the have individual and been Senator reliance over
 Brunswick , responsibility Joe Landry time is came the from communities - where in on reliance shaped It and , New small passed self have Pelé lifestyles over individual . based Cap , where like - Senator on been and
 on New time the is individual on - . , have where Brunswick small from shaped Landry where It Cap Joe based responsibility been - in self and lifestyles communities came passed Senator reliance , Pelé and , over like
 , small responsibility on - came over Joe on in lifestyles Brunswick and New based is Landry passed shaped , reliance self and the where - , from been have Cap communities . time like It where individual Pelé Senator
Senator Bolduc :
It has not very much accountability to the Canadian public. 
This has been discussed many times in Quebec City and last year, for the first time, they appeared before a parliamentary committee. 
This is a serious matter.  
Senator Grafstein :
Honourable senators, I do not question the issue of accountability. 
The problem is whether one would be able to obtain the very best people by the public process, the newspaper process or the media process, or whether the accountability process is better when governments, which are indirectly accountable, make those appointments and those nominated are then accountable to a parliamentary committee.  
Senator Bolduc :
When you talk about "accountability," I would suggest that that is second best. 
It is not a perfect situation, although you will have a parliamentary committee taking some responsibility. 
It is better than nothing but, in my opinion, it is second best.  
I am fairly sure that, in one way, the pure accountability we are talking about is quasi-impossible. 
Have different people manage different funds so that we will have some evaluation, some comparison and some diversification.  
Hon. Michael A. Meighen :
Honourable senators, this is precisely where I wanted clarification. 
Are you recommending that the fund be divided into four $25-billion portions and that so many firms administer each $25-billion portion in its entirety? 
Or are you recommending that one firm be responsible for one sector, such as the real estate sector and another firm be responsible for another sector?  
Senator Bolduc :
Honourable senators, in my opinion, it could be by sector, but my preference would be for the total to be broken down into four portions covering a variety of investments. 
Otherwise, if you have a block of $25 or $30 billion in real estate, you know what that means. 
 It is in the small communities like Cap - Pelé , New Brunswick where Senator Joe Landry came from , where lifestyles based on self - reliance and individual responsibility have been shaped and passed on over time .
 where is lifestyles like - based Cap time - been and from where . came , small and have on Brunswick the Landry responsibility Joe individual It shaped passed Senator communities , New reliance Pelé in on self over
 have Brunswick lifestyles where . Joe New reliance , passed Cap from self like , and over the Pelé individual is in came responsibility small on , and Senator It where on based been - time Landry - shaped
 came based is from time - where lifestyles communities Landry , small been have Cap on over passed individual , Pelé and Senator , New reliance It Brunswick where . shaped Joe responsibility self like on in the and
Joe's story is also about individual responsibility to his many employees throughout Atlantic Canada and in the communities in which they lived, because he took great pride in putting money into equipment for his plants, believing that that kind of investment - not expenditures on personal luxuries, but on investments that he thought were for the good of his employees - was his contribution to the common good.  
 plants that in that . his for in the thought investments s and because , personal of on good believing Joe individual his , luxuries the to throughout he Canada contribution on story lived took were employees is pride they his responsibility good into employees about he common in was - - investment for ' expenditures money putting to kind great Atlantic the that equipment which not many but of also communities his ,
 to his believing , because that kind Atlantic on great on , for took good throughout ' that investments his which his the individual into Canada of in - luxuries common s his thought personal in Joe the plants employees not was pride is investment responsibility - about story employees money the he for but . also communities equipment to good he and many in putting were lived that contribution , they expenditures of
 in took great he luxuries contribution Atlantic in of equipment communities Joe for plants to that the his money expenditures good to employees was his s not they investments responsibility is throughout because many for on but - personal employees putting - and . he of believing in good his story kind into , individual investment Canada thought the , which that his the also were about that on ' pride , lived common
 about communities to but the luxuries in Joe into good money also in story investments because is he his expenditures the the his that he plants good great contribution that of Atlantic s personal ' for - putting kind . , on pride throughout his individual of to investment that were not common employees which - employees they was took , equipment Canada many his lived thought , for in and believing on responsibility
 on of plants , in to s which and the putting equipment employees took responsibility , , ' good for they was of his thought individual communities on employees in - kind good about he the the investments he were expenditures lived but not investment to many for is his his also that believing money Atlantic - common into contribution Canada . that pride story Joe because his personal in throughout that luxuries great
 he of his plants , money expenditures were common thought but good for they to was his the his , individual also is - lived on that ' investment equipment - throughout that for communities responsibility because investments he putting on personal Atlantic good . and contribution many employees which took not believing the in of in , into to great kind Joe that in his pride Canada story employees about s luxuries the
 s Atlantic was in the many he because they his Canada in Joe individual into he were about - , kind - lived which for took to equipment is of plants employees also his common investment of ' personal that responsibility believing putting . luxuries on not in , the money but contribution good good expenditures and for great to his that , story employees the pride investments that his thought throughout communities on
 on Atlantic were his the that great luxuries employees s kind into putting communities to they - ' because - and story many common good the contribution also believing individual for on . he but he good about expenditures , of lived for his money personal plants employees of which thought , his investments Joe , Canada responsibility his is took pride to in throughout not investment equipment that in in that the was
 responsibility that that took for many his employees Joe but personal good putting in that on plants to money his , common individual lived the kind of equipment thought , s and Canada his for expenditures Atlantic communities believing because ' , luxuries they investment of is about in contribution good great employees which the on story the was he were - throughout in not . to pride his also investments into - he
 also kind his which on throughout - individual into , , personal thought that in but on good were his his believing for in employees in and great his contribution to the plants . luxuries lived pride putting ' investments that employees was s the common about communities money of good expenditures the is of investment he for many that , Joe responsibility story Atlantic not to equipment they Canada took he - because
 kind of took in he s on also equipment great money throughout plants good to Canada putting Joe for , is thought responsibility communities luxuries was on employees individual not the investment contribution for his many which were in of common story and but that to the that personal . good - pride his , ' he the that lived in believing Atlantic his because - they about employees expenditures investments into his ,
 responsibility lived communities contribution - . employees on good for in because for , the of that the also not on throughout that and which believing expenditures his , good his pride his investment ' common personal the Atlantic kind into , Canada took were great equipment story many employees to investments in is he money but thought Joe in he s luxuries was putting about that - of individual his to they plants
 into Atlantic Joe equipment lived common Canada pride to his in that good great plants is to , individual throughout and about communities the the his investment . for many contribution they but that , employees also which - his in - s kind was of employees believing took luxuries in personal his , ' expenditures story he not that were he the good responsibility putting on money for investments thought on because of
 personal his not , and money of expenditures lived kind throughout s Atlantic . was , common on in which communities for on great that about - they thought he were Joe pride investments into - for equipment ' good responsibility , the his his in contribution story the of that luxuries that many his believing is in investment putting employees plants also the employees good he Canada to but because took individual to
 is they personal lived Canada ' employees communities common story on kind contribution believing and the he plants that pride the - throughout employees investment of the his to but for money thought also for s individual great that not in in expenditures Atlantic , into Joe investments took which were in - was luxuries his , many . about putting his that he to good equipment his responsibility , of on good because
 throughout great about - believing his money s they that to also on pride to , , the the his for into many not responsibility communities ' , he . on story common kind equipment Joe contribution but is - which Canada in in employees his plants and luxuries good lived of that expenditures good his investment investments for thought individual were in because of that took Atlantic the he personal employees was putting
That is what Reform was proposing through the election campaign and over the previous four years. 
They have changed. 
Now they want a smaller CPP.  
However, Preston Manning could never explain the first program. 
Now they have a CPP program which they wanted to explain to the minister in committee. 
Well, they could not get it together. 
Preston Manning, who made a promise to do it before committee meetings ended in the other place, failed to do it. 
I can see why.  
They are making false accusations in the House about people. 
It is the typical Reform program we have come to expect. 
They are off in left field somewhere, although I do not think they would want to be described that way.  
Now they want to create a super-RRSP, which does not make any sense because, not only is it at odds with what they said in committee and what they said in the election campaign, it does not fit into their tax plan. 
Remember, they have a tax plan with a flat tax. 
With the flat tax, you reduce the amount of exemptions. 
We are not getting any ideas from them.  
Now I will turn to the Liberals.  
Senator Gigantès :
Be careful.  
Senator Tkachuk :
Since taking office, they have taken $300 million in new taxes from senior citizens by income-testing the age credit. 
 Joe ' s story is also about individual responsibility to his many employees throughout Atlantic Canada and in the communities in which they lived , because he took great pride in putting money equipment for his plants , believing that that kind of investment - not expenditures on personal luxuries , but on investments that he thought were for the good of his employees - was his contribution to the common good .
 - responsibility s the equipment contribution took his investment plants on into of of they many employees , were about also Atlantic the money he because for is his to ' he throughout individual in employees - . common Joe pride thought communities Canada in good good not putting lived his story that that was which believing investments for to expenditures great kind in but and on luxuries that his personal the ,
 he employees not is kind was Atlantic lived good also the Canada - , thought that investment on for good plants but equipment s contribution communities employees - responsibility to believing for the into Joe personal to were his they the because , money in that in luxuries his about of took pride great and throughout . investments story his , which individual on of in he common that many putting expenditures '
 of s good putting on investment in employees his contribution good also and . into the plants on investments thought equipment , money that were lived his - not story , luxuries employees his , Joe the to common expenditures was for to individual many Atlantic personal believing of he - Canada responsibility ' which because he pride but kind the took that in great communities about in for is they that throughout
The proud father of seven children, Joe never forgot his roots.  
 of . Joe forgot father his proud children , roots never The seven
 forgot his children Joe never proud of roots seven , father The .
 never his Joe , seven children . roots The of forgot father proud
 Joe children of father , roots his proud The seven forgot never .
 seven Joe his children , of father roots . forgot proud never The
 Joe never , proud father his roots seven forgot . of children The
 seven . his proud roots father of forgot children never The , Joe
 of children seven roots never . his The , Joe father forgot proud
 The his forgot children proud seven roots , Joe father never of .
 seven of his never forgot children . Joe father roots , proud The
 seven Joe father . of never children The , forgot his proud roots
 never roots his Joe children seven . father proud of The forgot ,
 of father proud his roots forgot seven . children never , Joe The
 of forgot The proud children seven his father Joe roots . never ,
 father Joe The forgot , proud roots . of his never seven children
 seven children of his father , never Joe forgot roots proud . The
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
I had thought that Mr. Dion answered that question himself on the weekend when he said that a UDI would be illegal.  
Senator Nolin :
The Prime Minister has said he was prepared to negotiate. 
The Leader of the Government in the Senate has said the government is not prepared to negotiate.  
This morning, the Quebec minister of intergovernmental affairs, Mr. Brassard, said, and I quote: 
This is what we have always said.  
Bear in mind that this minister is a separatist. 
I repeat what he said: 
This is what we have always said.  
Mr. Chrétien has acknowledged that the federal government would negotiate. 
Could the Leader of the Government in the Senate tell us under what authority the Prime Minister could negotiate?  
Senator Graham :
The Prime Minister would be negotiating on behalf of Canadians, but recognizing at the same time that nine other provinces and the territories are involved. 
I am sure the Prime Minister would take all of that into consideration.  
Senator Nolin :
The Supreme Court received the request from your government to decide on the issue of Quebec's secession. 
We will learn in all likelihood from the Supreme Court that the amending formula would be appropriate if Canadians agreed to allow one province to separate from the others. 
Have the Prime Minister, the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs or officials of your government had formal or informal discussions on this matter with the representatives of the nine other provinces?  
Senator Graham :
 The proud father of seven , Joe never forgot his roots .
 roots father . proud forgot The Joe of , never seven children
 never Joe roots forgot father his children . of seven , The
 of his never Joe forgot , proud roots children seven . The
Honourable senators, Joe Landry knew very well the importance and the meaning of life. 
 Honourable the meaning senators the Joe life very and of importance Landry well , . knew
 . importance the well very Landry life and Joe senators of meaning knew , Honourable the
 importance senators the the of Landry life meaning very knew . , Honourable and well Joe
 well very life , . of meaning knew senators the importance Honourable Joe the and Landry
 very Honourable the . importance life knew meaning senators and the , well Joe of Landry
 , Landry of and importance senators the very . knew life Honourable well meaning Joe the
 Joe well senators , meaning and life very Honourable importance the of Landry knew the .
 Honourable life the meaning . of Joe the knew , Landry very and importance senators well
 Landry , knew senators the meaning well importance of life Joe the . very and Honourable
 importance , life senators . the of knew very the and well Joe Honourable meaning Landry
 life the Landry the Honourable well of knew Joe , . very senators meaning and importance
 life well the very , meaning Joe of the importance Honourable . senators and knew Landry
 Joe of , well the Landry the knew life meaning . senators Honourable importance very and
 well knew Honourable importance Joe , of very life the meaning Landry the senators and .
 Joe senators importance life the and Honourable well of very the . knew meaning , Landry
 Joe Landry Honourable . well life the very and importance of knew meaning the , senators
That is unfair. 
They are not without some type of relief and I will address that later.  
However, this is an issue of linguistic rights. 
Here the question is not of linguistic rights but denominational privileges.  
In cross-examining Alliance Quebec, it was clear that they did not oppose the amendments to section 93 but rather the enforcement of section 23(1)( a ). Section 23(1)( a ) requires a proclamation by the Province of Quebec, and a declaration of this proclamation is, of course, not within federal powers. 
We gave that up in 1982.  
Senator Pitfield knows this well. 
He was an architect of the Constitution Act, 1982. 
It is clearly within the four corners of the assembly of Quebec to proclaim, if it chooses, section 23(1)( a ). Many of us are unhappy with this aspect of section 23(1)( a ). Students in over 13,000 families have been precluded from entering the English stream because the Province of Quebec has refused to proclaim section 23(1)( a ). 
Senator Lynch-Staunton :
Who put it in?  
Senator Grafstein :
Rather, they wished to use this opportunity to leverage the Government of Quebec to proclaim section 23(1)( a ). This the Quebec government was clearly not prepared to do.  
The second group, the aboriginal groups within Quebec, claimed that this resolution detrimentally affected their rights. 
The report makes clear - and we came to this conclusion aided and abetted by legal advice and statements by both Quebec and federal ministers - that aboriginal rights were in no way, shape or form, affected by this resolution. 
We said so in the report.  
This left two groups, small but important, who claim to be detrimentally affected. 
It was not clear that the entirety of these two groups were objecting. 
These are the two groups to which Senator Bolduc referred.  
There were certain spokespersons representing these groups. 
 Honourable senators Joe Landry knew very well the importance and the meaning of life .
 senators very life importance the well Joe the Honourable meaning knew . Landry , of
 , knew meaning . Joe Landry of very Honourable importance the and life the well
 knew meaning very the well life importance Joe Landry , senators Honourable and of .
He also knew the value of cooperation; no matter what the occasion was, he knew that the future of the nation revolved around the community to which we belong. 
 that matter of revolved he to no around the the occasion nation belong was ; of the the value we community knew what which knew cooperation future the also He , .
 revolved of what , future the also the He nation which community knew the . knew to was value the occasion we ; the belong he cooperation that matter around of no
 what the around of matter the to nation community value belong of cooperation revolved we ; that , was he He future also occasion the no which knew knew . the the
 which that He to the cooperation nation matter occasion also future ; , knew of he community around no the we the the of . belong the what revolved knew value was
 ; the that he of the to which cooperation community revolved nation of , knew future the what was value knew belong the no also He around matter the we . occasion
 also cooperation , community the the value occasion that nation revolved belong around of he which we ; the knew what future of no knew . was the the matter to He
 which ; future he the community the value was He nation of the what matter , revolved occasion that also belong of . cooperation we no around the knew the knew to
 , . the of the He belong occasion to value that he the the cooperation also around knew of future matter which ; nation the community was knew we no revolved what
 of future belong , which value . the that what matter of ; the no to cooperation He nation also was community revolved occasion around knew the knew the he the we
 of that nation cooperation He . also he knew occasion what the the the matter the knew community future to the which ; belong around no value was revolved , of we
 the community that no of the future nation knew he what He the the ; also value of cooperation around matter , which the . was we belong to occasion revolved knew
 matter what we , the cooperation the knew value was which future belong community no revolved also the that the of occasion of around ; knew nation the . he He to
 to around nation revolved we no of matter belong the . the , which also ; occasion that the was cooperation He of value what the he community future the knew knew
 revolved cooperation we the the ; which belong the occasion , the He future that community to . was nation around of knew he also what of value no knew matter the
 ; which nation , that he of revolved the community was the occasion future knew also what . knew cooperation matter no to the the of belong the around He we value
 of was revolved he of we cooperation He knew the ; . knew occasion matter what the that around the the belong community also which nation , no to future value the
He added, at the instigation of some, that it would also be an instrument of economic development, with the result that, little by little, the managers who were not sufficiently dynamic in the eyes of the directors were replaced. 
It was not Mr. Caouette's money, it was real bucks. 
The second director was also an experienced investment fund manager, but the government changed in Quebec, and we ended up with people who were more dynamic and who wanted to direct the economy. 
That is when it was decided that the people running the Caisse were not dynamic enough and had to be replaced. 
That was done. 
That is how a deputy minister of finance came to be the president of the Caisse de dépôt et placement du Québec at a time when Finance Minister Parizeau was a very influential member of the Lévesque cabinet. 
This led Quebec industry leaders and other stakeholders to raise all sorts of questions about the policy and management of the Caisse under his direction.  
You know the arbitrary risks inherent in choosing the companies in which the board can invest. 
Of course, there are provisions to limit the ratio, but everyone knows that the percentage of shares required today to control a company is relatively small. 
Can you imagine what kind of arm-twisting this will lead to? 
To collectivize an operation is to politicize it. 
That is what we are doing here, notwithstanding the precaution taken to maintain the board members' independence from the government. 
Even if we are told that they will come from outside the government and operate at arm's length from the government, we must be realistic.  
I would now like to address an important aspect of the bill, namely the impact of the plan on the two pillars of income security mentioned by Senator Kirby. 
The 25 or 30 per cent amounting to $22 billion a year goes to old age pensions. 
Every year, we save $80 billion, or 10 per cent of the gross national product, which goes to income security, including $22 billion from old age pensions, $23 billion from the Canada pension fund and $30 billion or $35 billion from private pension plans. 
Savings coming from private pension plans should remain stable in the future or else get smaller depending on the decisions we make. 
Contributions will increase by 70 per cent within five to seven years. 
I think the amounts will remain stable, but they could also drop, if this increase is not compensated by an equivalent decrease in income tax, for instance.  
As for RRSPs, they are likely to diminish if employment insurance contributions and taxes are not lowered.  
 He also knew the value of cooperation ; no matter what the occasion was , he knew that the future of the nation revolved around the community which we belong .
 revolved the knew belong what we matter to cooperation He value he . , that occasion the the nation of the the around of ; community no was also knew which
 to the what the nation the was belong value knew revolved no . , around the we of the that matter ; also of future he community cooperation knew which occasion
 . belong nation he , the what occasion community also around cooperation of ; the of was revolved value the He the knew that to we matter future which the no
He believed in family values, which are the key to our identity.  
 . key family , identity are believed in our which values to the He
 , to are family values in He key the . which identity believed our
 , identity values to which are believed our . He family the in key
 key He our identity . believed in values are the which family , to
 the , values family in He which to identity believed key our . are
 family to the identity key believed which in are our He . values ,
 key . to are the family which values identity He in , our believed
 , in identity family values are which our believed to key the . He
 He our . the which values identity , believed in key are family to
 family values identity key are He the . believed in which our , to
 key family our believed He which . the are identity , values in to
 He , to family . the which values in are our key believed identity
 believed in to identity He values . key family are our which the ,
 identity values key to He which in our the family . are , believed
 . which , family in are the to He key our identity believed values
 He values believed the , family identity to are which our key . in
Senator Lucier has underlined the word "says."  
- he has bone cancer and must live in the British Columbia city for treatments".  
Senator Lucier replies: 
I wonder if Jack Aubry is questioning the fact that I have cancer. 
I would gladly give him permission to question my doctor as to whether I have had cancer for 10 years.  
4. I would like to have these points clarified but not in the media. 
I truly appreciate all the support I have received from my colleagues regarding this subject. 
Thanks to all of you.  
History of the Vote in Canada 
Book Launched by Governor General 
Hon. Mabel M. DeWare :
Honourable senators, yesterday, the Right Honourable Romeo LeBlanc, Governor General of Canada, launched an important new book, A History of the Vote in Canada , which recounts how the right to vote has evolved over the past 250 years. 
The book starts at the time of the first elected legislatures in what is now Canada and ends with the most recent federal election. 
It traces changes in voting eligibility, electioneering and voting practices, as well as voter turnout since Confederation. 
Extension of the vote to those who were excluded legally from the franchise, such as women, aboriginal people, religious and racial minorities, is examined in the social context of the period.  
Even though most Canadian adults were eligible to vote by 1920, there is a final chapter that looks at ways to make voting accessible to everyone, including people in all geographic locations and people with physical disabilities.  
A History of the Vote in Canada is meant to be an educational resource and a reminder to Canadians of the significance of the right to vote. 
This is in keeping with Elections Canada's 1993 mandate to educate voters about the democratic right to vote.  
While this book will appeal to historians, political scientists, university and high school teachers and students, it is hoped that it will also reach those who may have difficulty exercising their right to vote.  
As parliamentarians, honourable senators, it is our role to help promote this book and educate our fellow citizens on their rights as voters.  
 He believed in family values , which are key to our identity .
 in to are our identity believed He , values family . the key
 He . which values family , in the key identity believed are to
 . He are to values , which our the family identity key believed
Woodrow Wilson once said that the man who is swimming against the stream knows the strength of it. 
 . once that the against the is strength swimming stream knows who man it the Wilson of Woodrow said
 swimming it once the man . is said against strength the that the stream of who Wilson Woodrow knows
 . Wilson stream man the against that it who swimming Woodrow said the knows the strength is of once
 the . that against knows Woodrow man of swimming stream once the said strength Wilson it who the is
 it knows the is the once . of the Wilson stream said Woodrow that who man swimming against strength
 . swimming the the man against it that said Woodrow is the knows stream who strength of once Wilson
 who Wilson once of that against the said knows stream the Woodrow . swimming is man the it strength
 of against is the who man said . strength the swimming once Woodrow it the knows that Wilson stream
 knows of is man the said once swimming Wilson Woodrow the the that stream against it strength who .
 Woodrow of strength against is swimming the the the stream Wilson . it said knows who man that once
 is . man strength knows the once against said Woodrow the Wilson swimming of that stream the it who
 . Wilson said the once knows Woodrow stream that who man swimming the of strength is it the against
 man the Wilson said knows it that once stream . strength the who of the against swimming Woodrow is
 is strength said that once knows of against swimming stream the the the man who Wilson it Woodrow .
 knows . swimming that Wilson is of stream strength man the against once it the said Woodrow the who
 the Wilson Woodrow swimming is strength the . of against the knows who that stream it man once said
The Standing Senate Committee on Energy, the Environment and Natural Resources has the honour to present its 
SECOND REPORT 
Respectfully submitted, 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this bill be read the third time?  
On motion of Senator Butts, bill placed on the Orders of the Day for third reading at the next sitting of the Senate.  
Income Tax Conventions Implementation Act, 1997 
Report of Committee 
Hon. Michael Kirby , Chairman of the Standing Senate Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce, presented the following report: 
Tuesday, December 9, 1997 
The Standing Senate Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce has the honour to present its 
SIXTH REPORT 
Your Committee, to which was referred the Bill C-10, Act to implement a convention between Canada and Sweden, a convention between Canada and the Republic of Kazakhstan, a convention between Canada and the Republic of Iceland and a convention between Canada and the Kingdom of Denmark for the avoidance of double taxation and the prevention of fiscal evasion with respect to taxes on income and to amend the Canada-Netherlands Income Tax Convention Act, 1986 and the Canada-United States Tax Convention Act, 1984, has examined the said Bill in obedience to its Order of Reference dated December 8, 1997, and now reports the same without amendment.  
Respectfully submitted, 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, when shall this bill be read the third time?  
On motion of Senator Kirby, bill placed on the Orders of the Day for third reading at the next sitting of the Senate.  
Present State and Future of Agriculture 
Report of Agriculture and Forestry Committee Tabled 
Hon. Leonard J. Gustafson :
 Woodrow Wilson once said that the man who is swimming against the stream knows the strength of it
 once man it against is the the . the that Wilson said knows Woodrow swimming of who strength
 of who it . once Woodrow is against stream the strength swimming man knows the the said that
 the strength once swimming . is stream Wilson man said it of Woodrow who the that knows against
Joe was exceedingly frank with us in this chamber on the subject of his own speech disability. 
 on . was the disability us his in own chamber of frank subject with this speech Joe exceedingly
 with his exceedingly this . own Joe the chamber in disability us subject of on speech frank was
 in us . this exceedingly Joe the subject disability of own his was with speech frank chamber on
 was with this Joe own of . frank his exceedingly in disability the subject us speech chamber on
 in chamber was frank subject own . us Joe of with his the on exceedingly this disability speech
 of chamber on own . this was subject speech in exceedingly the frank disability us his Joe with
 with frank Joe own . in subject was on the exceedingly speech his disability of us chamber this
 his this the frank us exceedingly . chamber with was subject of on Joe own disability speech in
 was . on disability subject in with of own the frank exceedingly his this Joe speech chamber us
 frank this own disability the was of subject chamber Joe speech in . on his exceedingly us with
 his subject on was chamber speech . frank in us own exceedingly the Joe disability this with of
 us own speech subject of Joe on chamber with the . frank this in was his exceedingly disability
 own with this . his disability was Joe exceedingly of on chamber subject frank the speech in us
 this was speech Joe chamber exceedingly us with own in his disability the subject of on . frank
 . subject Joe his chamber exceedingly on speech was disability us of with the own this frank in
 of was speech this exceedingly disability . frank his chamber own on subject us in with Joe the
Whereas the Government of Quebec has indicated that it intends to establish French and English linguistic school boards in Quebec; 
and whereas the National Assembly of Quebec has passed a resolution authorizing an amendment to the Constitution of Canada; 
and whereas the National Assembly of Quebec has reaffirmed the established rights of the English-speaking community of Quebec, specifically the right, in accordance with the law of Quebec, of members of that community to have their children receive their instruction in English language educational facilities that are under the management and control of that community and are financed through public funds; 
and whereas section 23 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms guarantees to citizens throughout Canada rights to minority language instruction and minority language educational facilities under the management and control of linguistic minorities and provided out of public funds; 
and whereas section 43 of the Constitution Act, 1982 provides that an amendment to the Constitution of Canada may be made by proclamation issued by the Governor General under the Great Seal of Canada where so authorized by resolutions of the Senate and House of Commons and of the legislative assembly of each province to which the amendment applies; 
now therefore the Senate resolves that an amendment to the Constitution of Canada be authorized to be made by proclamation issued by His Excellency the Governor General under the Great Seal of Canada in accordance with the schedule hereto.  
SCHEDULE 
AMENDMENT TO THE CONSTITUTION OF CANADA 
CONSTITUTION ACT, 1867 
The Constitution Act, 1867, is amended by adding, immediately after section 93, the following: 
"93A. 
Paragraphs (1) to (4) of section 93 do not apply to Quebec." 
CITATION 
2. This Amendment may be cited as the Constitution Amendment (year of proclamation) (Quebec).  
The special joint committee on which I have the honour to sit was given the mandate of studying the proposed amendment to section 93. 
Today, we have before us the resolution to amend section 93 of the Constitution Act, 1867.  
Briefly put, I support this resolution. 
I am also convinced that the majority of Catholic parents in Quebec who enjoy the guarantees provided under section 93 support this amendment, as do the majority of Protestant parents, who are in the same situation.  
However, the Quebec National Assembly will no longer be subject to legislation predating Confederation with respect to denominational instruction.  
These laws of Quebec that predate Confederation and concern Catholic and Protestant denominational schools have led to the creation of an unusual system, which gave Catholic and Protestant parents different rights, according to where they lived in the province.  
 Joe was exceedingly frank us in this chamber on the subject of his own speech disability .
 us frank his the exceedingly was on chamber Joe of subject . disability this own speech with
 Joe . chamber disability this with on the in frank was his exceedingly own speech us subject
 exceedingly own disability was in chamber this on of Joe . speech subject his the us with
You will recall that, a few months ago, he spoke of his life as an endless fight. 
 ago few months will life that an as . endless of , fight his You , recall he a spoke
 as a You , that of life endless months an recall spoke fight few will his he , . ago
 he . You recall as life , ago months an few of that fight endless will , a his spoke
 of few will . , , months fight a ago his as recall he that You spoke endless life an
 You few . life an , as of fight ago a he his months recall endless will that , spoke
 spoke months will a an that . , few of recall ago he life his , fight You endless as
 life a spoke fight will months he ago his as You , , of an . endless recall that few
 life few spoke recall , endless , as his of You . he months will that fight a ago an
 an spoke months , life fight few will a of his recall You that as . he endless , ago
 ago You will of , his he , as a few fight endless . life months an that recall spoke
 , fight You , he an ago months . life recall few spoke as will that endless his of a
 ago spoke life months , few a recall as fight . his an he , that will of You endless
 that recall ago few You his life months as fight spoke of will , . an he a , endless
 spoke as , that months , fight his of will recall an You a . endless life ago he few
 that , endless fight an months ago a , life spoke of . he as You his will few recall
 endless spoke life fight his . of an that he You as few recall , months , ago a will
The Anglican Bishop of Montreal, in a letter dated November 3, 1997, to the same minister, and included in the report as Appendix I, wrote as follows: 
...we...favour the creation of linguistic school boards and the establishment of a non-denominational educational system which respects the choice of parents to require that their children receive religious and moral education in conformity with their beliefs.  
We cannot afford to ignore these views, particularly as they coincide with those of many, parents in particular, who testified before the committee. 
Linguistic schools are quite acceptable, we heard repeatedly, as long as the present religious component is maintained.  
Franco-Protestants and English Catholics were particularly concerned. 
While numerically they may not be impressive to others, surely they must be to the Parliament of Canada, the guardian of minority rights. 
Surely, the Parliament of Canada cannot subscribe to the notion that the rights of minorities can be altered, much less obliterated, by a decision of a majority when, at best, that majority may have a detached interest in the concerns and preoccupations of the minority.  
Some assurances may be found in a statement made by the Quebec Department of Education in a advertising supplement which appeared in The Gazette of Montreal on November 29. 
It is headed: "Confessional Schools and Services." 
I will read the two pertinent paragraphs. 
This is the official Quebec policy, from the Department of Education, on confessional schools and services under the new linguistic board system. 
It states: 
The change from religion-based to language-based school boards does not mean that all Québec schools will become secular. 
Each institution will have the option of maintaining or reviewing its current status as a Catholic or Protestant school. 
Students will continue to take religion courses or to receive pastoral animation or religious care and guidance services if they so desire.  
Before the end of the third year after the linguistic school boards are in place, the schools will be asked to consult the parents and decide whether or not they wish to maintain their confessional status.  
Those unfamiliar with Catholic and Protestant school boards in Montreal and Quebec City should know that in many cases, particularly in the Protestant system, it is the language of instruction which predominates. 
Many schools have little, if any, religious content, while in others it is very strong. 
Parents already have a say in how much religion they want their children exposed to and that will continue under the new system.  
While section 93 guarantees are only a matter of religious denominations, the essential characteristics of the resulting Quebec school system have, nonetheless, been linguistic. 
 You will recall that , a few months ago he spoke of his life as an endless fight .
 spoke endless , life of as . ago an , few months his a he recall will that You
 You will fight spoke he few that months his recall . ago of as , life , endless a
 , few . he fight an will months You , of spoke his as life a recall endless that
We were all moved by his words. 
 all his by moved . words were We
 words . moved all his were We by
 all moved words his were . We by
 his We . by all moved words were
 all We . by his words were moved
 words . were all his We moved by
 . by moved We were his all words
 all words moved were by . his We
 We by . words were moved his all
 We all . by were words his moved
 . all We words moved his by were
 We were all words moved his . by
 by were words his . moved We all
 his . moved were We all by words
 We moved by words his all were .
 We were all moved words his by .
( b ) the Senate finds it repugnant that the Supreme Court is infringing on the sovereign rights of Parliament to enact legislation and is failing to respect the constitutional comity between the courts and Parliament; and 
( c ) the Court is in effect coercing Parliament by threatening chaotic consequences respecting law enforcement and arrests if Parliament does not pass this bill."  
Hon. Orville H. Phillips :
Honourable senators, I had adjourned the debate but I understand Senator Wood wishes to speak.  
Hon. Dalia Wood :
Honourable senators, I rise to speak in support of Senator Cools's amendment. 
The amendment, described as a reasoned amendment, is a parliamentary device which allows a member to raise concerns and opposition to the principles of a bill. 
The public's emerging concern with judicial activism, particularly in the area of criminal law, is compelling our interest and study. 
An example of this concern may be found in a December letter to The Ottawa Citizen . 
We should be mindful of these growing questions and concerns.  
I commend Senator Cools for bringing this amendment forward at this time. 
She often acts as our conscience, and I, for one, would like to thank her for all the hard work she puts into researching the bills that come before us.  
Senator Phillips :
Honourable senators, I was rather reluctant to enter this debate because I do not have a legal mind. 
Then the thought occurred to me that most lawyers do not either - and that includes a number of them in this chamber.  
My interest in this subject was piqued by a newspaper article where a detective was complaining about the awkward situation he would be in if this bill passed. 
Formerly, if he was pursuing someone into an apartment building, he could go in under the provisions of a hot pursuit and arrest the individual. 
Now, if the person being pursued enters an apartment building, and there are 50 or 60 apartments in the building, the detective is worrying that when he goes to a judge to get a warrant, does he have to get a warrant for each of the apartments in the building, because he really does not know which one he is in.  
Two people said they saw Mr. Feeney drive Mr. Boyle's truck from the scene. 
The police followed a truck to Mr. Feeney's residence. 
 We were moved by his words .
 all words by were his . moved
 his . We were all moved words
 were his by all words moved We
He spoke of children afflicted with speech problems and of the pain they suffer at the hands of their peers. 
 children speech their peers the with He problems at and of hands pain they . of afflicted spoke the of suffer
 with hands problems speech afflicted they of the of pain spoke peers children the their and of at . suffer He
 hands suffer He with peers problems the afflicted of spoke and of pain at the . they speech their of children
 peers pain hands speech spoke of their of children with of they the afflicted He suffer . problems at the and
 with of afflicted speech pain and . the they the peers hands spoke children of problems of at He their suffer
 peers and the with . of children speech suffer spoke of at the He pain of they their problems afflicted hands
 speech of pain and children afflicted their suffer hands they He with . at the of the peers of spoke problems
 suffer the hands . with children He problems speech and afflicted of they spoke their of pain of the peers at
 of the suffer . they of problems peers speech He and the with of hands afflicted pain their spoke at children
 hands and the of with their . pain the they He of afflicted problems peers spoke of at children speech suffer
 with suffer and of . the speech pain they He problems of their peers at children the of afflicted hands spoke
 of of He and their hands peers with the afflicted pain spoke of . they suffer problems the children speech at
 of they spoke their and children with peers suffer of . hands of speech He problems at the the pain afflicted
 peers they their . suffer and the hands the at children spoke of afflicted with speech He of of problems pain
 spoke pain and they of of with at He . speech of the children suffer afflicted problems the hands their peers
 hands at and with of they problems He children spoke speech their the peers . the suffer of pain of afflicted
The government's usual modus operandi is diversion, mixed with a little fabrication. 
It was convenient to have the diversion of a postal strike with its ensuing back-to-work legislation before the house while Bill C-2 was being introduced in the other place and closure was being imposed. 
It was also convenient for the government to falsely accuse the former prime minister of criminal intent and behaviour after its incompetence was fully exposed to the Canadian public following the Quebec referendum.  
It is not a question of means justifying the end. 
In this bill, the means and the end are equally wrong.  
Time allocation has been imposed seven times on other bills, most recently on third reading of Bill C-22, the Pearson airport bill. 
It was imposed on Bill C-110 which proposed certain constitutional amendments; on Bill C-12 which dealt with employment insurance; and on the committee report on Term 17. 
It is becoming a habit; a habit that is hard to break.  
Bill C-2 is just another in a series of bad bills, incompetent work and dictatorial action. 
It was introduced last week in the Senate, preceded by time allocation in the other place. 
With passage of this bill, the government will be imposing the largest tax grab in the history of the country. 
Canadians are unaware of what is happening, in particular our young people who will be the most affected and the most mistreated. 
We owe it to them, our grandchildren and our children, to study this legislation thoroughly and to amend it, because it is not their fault that this program has been so badly managed. 
They will have little chance of collecting under the CPP, hence the changes the government intends to make.  
We are simply shovelling our hard-earned money into the greedy hands of Paul Martin, Minister of Finance, who wants to be the man who slays the deficit dragon, and we know how he intends to do it. 
He has followed three policy themes to accomplish that end.  
First, he has transferred much of the tax burden to the provinces, forcing what I call "downloaded increased taxes." 
Provincial and municipal governments, who were receiving less money, had to increase taxes. 
The government transferred debt.  
Second, this government has taken advantage of the low interest rates which resulted from the efforts of the Conservative government over eight years to bring the deficit and inflation under control and to bring interest rates down.  
 He spoke of children afflicted with speech problems and of the pain they suffer at the hands of their .
 peers suffer . of of the problems pain they and at the He children afflicted with spoke their of speech
 at with pain peers hands and of afflicted the . of spoke speech problems their the of children they suffer
 problems of peers hands of He spoke with and the speech . children their the suffer at they of pain
He suffered it at the hands of his peers. 
 . of at suffered it peers He his hands the
 of peers the his . He at suffered hands it
 . suffered peers He at it his of hands the
 suffered his He at of hands peers it . the
 He the hands his suffered . at it peers of
 the at . suffered of his peers hands He it
 He at of . it hands the suffered his peers
 suffered peers of He . the it hands at his
 at peers of . He suffered the hands his it
 the . it hands of at He peers his suffered
 hands suffered . He peers it at the of his
 at hands . of peers the He suffered it his
 his it peers the at suffered of . hands He
 it of his He the . hands at peers suffered
 . suffered at peers the his of it He hands
 at of it suffered peers hands his He . the
That, to me, is not responsible government whatsoever. 
Can you imagine a prime minister who said that he is a man of the people, a man who is determined to change the way government is done, now ramming through the most dramatic changes to our pension system without informing the Canadian public of just what the government is proposing and allowing input from them?  
Honourable senators, I refer to questions raised in this place over the last several months, questions that relate to the ever-increasing taxes that this government is imposing on the lives of all working Canadians. 
For example, on October 1, Senator Michael Meighen asked the following: 
My question relates to employment insurance premiums. 
Given that, according to best estimates, the account will be at a $16-billion surplus this fiscal year, could the Leader of the Government explain to members here today why his Minister of Finance refuses to consider any reductions of premiums...  
He went on further to state: 
Honourable senators, to bring C.D. Howe's quote up to date, "What's a billion?" 
To say that we should rejoice that the premium was not increased from $2.80 to $3.20 is a little like saying that the Leader of the Government should be happy that I am only going to whack him over the head three times instead of ten.  
It seems to me that employment insurance premiums should not be a primary method of fighting the deficit or the debt....  
Honourable senators, we are building this huge surplus and raising Canada Pension Plan premiums - in other words, it is a double tax on Canadians. 
You argue that the Canada Pension Plan is not a tax, but that is not how our kids see it. 
Our kids see it as a tax, because you are taxing their generation to pay for the retirement of our generation. 
It is a tax no matter what you say, and no matter how you say it.  
On October 23, I asked the following: 
Honourable senators, I rise to ask a follow-up question to the response of the Leader of the Government to Senator Meighen's question of October 1 on employment insurance premiums. 
The honourable leader stated that a cut in the EI premium would cost the government some $4.2 billion in lost revenues. 
I would point out to him that this amount may be overstated by 25 to 50 per cent, because it fails to take into consideration increased revenue through greater employment and investment that would be generated by a reduction in premiums.  
Be that as it may, the honourable leader will no doubt recall that in 1995, the Minister of Finance indicated that when the EI surplus reached $5 billion, we would reduce premiums to the break-even point because the surplus would then be sufficient to deal with a recession equivalent to the recession of 1990.  
Accordingly, would the Leader of the Government tell us for what purpose the government is accumulating a $7-billion surplus in the fund for this calendar year, a surplus which will total $13 billion by December 31, and $15 to $16 billion by the end of the fiscal year, namely March 31, 1998? Would the Leader of the Government clarify today whether the amount in excess of $5 billion is designed to deal with a future recession of a two- to three-year duration, with the unemployment rate in the range of 11 to 12 per cent, or is it simply a surtax on jobs through high EI premiums, with a view to using the accumulated surplus to reduce the deficit?  
 He suffered it at the hands of peers .
 . the hands He at his peers suffered of
 . hands He of it the suffered peers at
 his at He of the peers it suffered hands
He concluded his remarks with a passionate plea for government to become more involved in the treatment of speech impediments.  
 involved government in become impediments the passionate with concluded for treatment more . remarks He plea to his speech a of
 more of to treatment in involved remarks a speech concluded for his . He impediments passionate plea with government the become
 to his He a government of more impediments become passionate the in plea treatment . speech involved remarks concluded with for
 concluded the a with plea become passionate to speech for . remarks his more of impediments involved He treatment government in
 . in to concluded of with become the speech impediments treatment government passionate for He plea involved remarks his a more
 to become plea speech government impediments concluded for of a involved his treatment more with in passionate remarks He . the
 a his impediments remarks involved . government in plea speech for of concluded treatment more become He to the with passionate
 government a . speech treatment of the his remarks plea become with in impediments passionate He more concluded involved for to
 government become speech remarks the in concluded passionate of plea involved a to impediments more He . his with for treatment
 concluded more plea involved of government to speech with become in a impediments the treatment remarks . He for his passionate
 passionate government plea He involved the a more to . remarks his of for treatment concluded speech in become with impediments
 the in with to government more plea passionate a remarks for speech He become concluded involved his treatment . of impediments
 in become his remarks to speech government for the impediments treatment passionate . of a plea He with involved concluded more
 more . passionate the treatment speech plea concluded of to government become with He impediments his involved for in a remarks
 the involved a impediments government more . remarks of treatment in become his concluded to with plea passionate He for speech
 remarks impediments more . for become a his in the plea concluded to involved government of with speech passionate treatment He
Hon. J. Michael Forrestall :
Where are the other six? 
Are they on ships at sea? 
We have 30 in the inventory.  
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, the answer is yes, there are 30 helicopters in the inventory. 
As I indicated yesterday, 24 were cleared, and six remain to be inspected. 
They will be inspected by December 18.  
Of the 24 that were inspected, only two were found to be in need of repair. 
As to precisely where the other six are located, I would need to consult with the appropriate authorities at National Defence. 
I will bring forward an answer for my honourable friend.  
Senator Forrestall :
Was there any criticism from our NATO allies with respect to the grounding of these aircraft? 
My understanding is that these aircraft are at sea, and a number of them are engaged in some training exercises. 
Were we criticized for not being able to live up to our obligations?  
Senator Graham :
Not to my knowledge. 
It is my understanding that those helicopters are at sea on exercises. 
As to precisely where they are, on whatever ocean, I cannot positively say. 
It might be a military secret, as a matter of fact.  
 He concluded his remarks with a passionate plea for government to become more involved in the treatment of speech .
 government treatment concluded in of more become a remarks the speech to involved plea for with . his passionate impediments
 in his to of impediments He concluded government passionate a more involved plea the with treatment remarks for . speech
 passionate of involved in a to speech for become the government remarks plea his treatment concluded He impediments with .
It was a moving and emotional address that all of us who were in this chamber at the time remember well. 
 and . were all of moving this was in at well address a chamber time who emotional It remember that the us
 all moving and remember in us of time were that chamber this a who well emotional address It at . was the
 . at time It well moving emotional that remember chamber and address of a all was this us in the were who
 who a the address of all It . at that remember time and moving was in emotional chamber us well this were
 in moving a this time all It of at that and were . us who was address chamber the remember emotional well
 . address us were emotional was who moving time all It at and of the remember in a this well that chamber
 time at moving remember this were was emotional . us that who well of and all in chamber a the It address
 all address were at a remember . chamber It and emotional this time of that the in well us moving was who
 of moving emotional chamber time in were us was . all well address who at a the and remember this that It
 emotional in remember of a this . chamber us was time all were moving that who the It well and address at
 in all this a emotional that and time chamber address well were of at . who us was moving the It remember
 emotional at the chamber address time and . It remember were who was of us in moving that all a this well
 address the . were that emotional in remember It was time a at of moving this us well who all chamber and
 well remember us It a at chamber this were that the time moving of and who all was in emotional address .
 were moving us well time address the all remember who a and at chamber emotional in . that It of was this
 moving chamber well a who . and this in time all was us at were that remember emotional the of It address
Senator Comeau :
I might advise the minister that indeed there is a 49-per-cent limit on foreign ownership of licences. 
Unfortunately, almost nothing has been said by the negotiators as to how they will handle these extremely important issues that impact on all the coastal communities of Canada.  
As a supplementary, would the minister also advise whether the government negotiators have been consulting with the fishing industry on this subject? 
If so, what has been the government's position in relation to the fishing industry?  
Senator Graham :
The answer, honourable senators, is that they have been consulting with the fishing industry. 
I believe the position of the industry is exactly as suggested by my honourable friend. 
That is something else that I will have clarified for him.  
National Defence 
Search and Rescue Helicopter Replacement Program-Possible Cabinet Discussion on Awarding Contract for Helicopter Purchase-Government Position 
Hon. J. Michael Forrestall :
Honourable senators, did the cabinet consider the awarding of a contract for new search and rescue helicopters this morning? 
Hon. B. Alasdair Graham (Leader of the Government) :
Honourable senators, my honourable friend would be the first to recognize that it is not appropriate for me to comment on any discussions that took place in cabinet this morning. 
Hon. Lowell Murray :
Would it be appropriate for the honourable minister to let us know whether it was considered last week?  
Senator Graham :
The matter of the helicopters is under active consideration by the government.  
Cabinet met last Thursday. 
 was a moving and emotional address that all of us who were in this chamber at the time remember well .
 It address who that in us the all time of well moving emotional at remember chamber and was were a this
 emotional address moving well of who at us time that were It this remember all the was and in a chamber
 a time at all the remember emotional address this and moving was chamber in . It us who were well of
He told us that not all Canadian children have the resolve to get through life without a great deal more work in this area, and he said that, "Not many of the little children of today are as pig-headed as I was."  
 of as he of that headed said Not more as that today deal children - ." , us the to He many work told through not was resolve and without get " the this have are little all , pig children I life Canadian area in a great
 headed that children I " more all Not have many the Canadian us today children that area little the are a and get of not pig great of to in he as , told without resolve ." He was as deal work through - life said , this
 without headed that - Canadian in the to that many said " not told through life children ." I are all get a little as the today this , was of work resolve Not more children deal have as great , of he area He us pig and
 , little all He said , " the deal I a he that many was without get the this not through Canadian work to - more and ." area have today resolve as life told headed us children are in children pig great that of of Not as
 , ." of life children that area little , get headed " he pig are as the us a many have in great this told more of all through today to as - was children work said the He deal Canadian resolve not I without that and Not
 all the told Not area to many are in more He as he have said children was , without little headed deal this the ." great " children through that - resolve not today I work pig , of as us that Canadian get of and a life
 as us not get children more he the told work He life , little resolve this said the are today - have through and of that of headed as deal was all in that children Canadian without " many area to Not great a , ." pig I
 He ." little the more Not the get us as " , this area resolve through I deal pig and - have as headed Canadian work told children to of many that not great in was today said a children without life are of he that all ,
 in have the the this a I Not of many area that ." of " headed all pig as great as work , was through us deal without that today little - more children Canadian resolve are he children life He , told said get not to and
 that are the of Canadian a resolve deal he this all little great Not I told ." - " the have said life area headed us and not to without as , get work pig , many children He as through of that children today was in more
 said the pig that , us are of children told he many not as through Canadian more and work great without life this Not in " get that little deal I a - ." today area headed to He all as , resolve children was the have of
 he not children the that that ." many said today all was are Canadian He Not , work area and , headed in great pig of " of get to told children without more deal through resolve this have a little I life us as the as -
 more to work ." that of all get without as the this said , area pig through headed I Canadian told was are have little Not the as life , and that not children in resolve deal us - many he of " great children today He a
 , not are headed children of today have , more the said the He through of this little he many a as great without area that was - work deal Not get us as ." to that pig life all children Canadian resolve told and " I in
 Not he headed told all I children in - the resolve without more , get " of this to children that have said He was life area the great ." a work not through of as many today Canadian pig and as , are little that us deal
 this that headed more children work get area us " great , life the little through of was , pig the I children he are - deal as today resolve Canadian many not that all of as to a told without said in Not and He ." have
Now they want a smaller CPP.  
However, Preston Manning could never explain the first program. 
Now they have a CPP program which they wanted to explain to the minister in committee. 
Well, they could not get it together. 
Preston Manning, who made a promise to do it before committee meetings ended in the other place, failed to do it. 
I can see why.  
They are making false accusations in the House about people. 
It is the typical Reform program we have come to expect. 
They are off in left field somewhere, although I do not think they would want to be described that way.  
Now they want to create a super-RRSP, which does not make any sense because, not only is it at odds with what they said in committee and what they said in the election campaign, it does not fit into their tax plan. 
Remember, they have a tax plan with a flat tax. 
With the flat tax, you reduce the amount of exemptions. 
We are not getting any ideas from them.  
Now I will turn to the Liberals.  
Senator Gigantès :
Be careful.  
Senator Tkachuk :
Since taking office, they have taken $300 million in new taxes from senior citizens by income-testing the age credit. 
They want Canadians to mature their RRSPs by the year they turn 69 rather than the previous age limit of 71. 
However, seniors do not know about it, and this will be another huge tax grab - Merry Christmas, Canada - by the Liberal Government and Paul Martin. 
 told us that not all Canadian children have the resolve to get through life without a great deal more work in this area , and he said that , " Not many of the little children of today are as pig - headed as I was ."
 us little Canadian told that He resolve great that deal - headed get are of work not , and said he through without as more area , the to of ." all I the today have this children was Not in a as life many " pig
 a deal the Canadian area was that life that pig not the us ." are in , " of as children of , more as through have said little children He great he this resolve headed today Not get without and all to I many told work
 - as Canadian many pig work said ." resolve great told deal without headed get was little us in He all have today " children to Not the the , and this life as a more of children that I of are not he that through ,
It has been said that the true value of a man is not measured by his easy triumphs, but by his courage in the face of challenge and adversity and his willingness to serve his fellow citizens.  
 but by . by measured the fellow his that adversity to value courage of It willingness has and is true not the man his serve been challenge a his his easy triumphs said face and of , in citizens
 the that It true willingness his is serve triumphs the a but and adversity challenge and face his in has citizens fellow by of by of to measured been his . courage value his said man easy not ,
 citizens adversity not , said of easy is triumphs has measured man It but been . in of and value face challenge by by fellow a that the true the his to his and his serve willingness courage his
 easy citizens courage triumphs willingness adversity and the and true a not of man his that his value of his by but challenge has is by to . measured face the said in serve fellow It , his been
 man value the his by adversity , his courage face fellow the been challenge a of easy but willingness in and serve triumphs and said is to citizens It measured that his his of has . not true by
 a willingness his easy citizens been . that is of courage his It triumphs his by , of and has in serve adversity value true by measured not challenge man to but fellow said the the face his and
 the , his true face triumphs adversity been not . and It by and willingness is by citizens challenge a his fellow said easy the of to has value serve of measured that in his courage but his man
 not value challenge man citizens It said , and the of serve courage a his been true in face the has . his fellow by easy but that willingness by his measured and triumphs his adversity of to is
 man his measured adversity a said by his face citizens has the but and of and . by that his the fellow serve been triumphs It willingness courage is true , not of his to in value challenge easy
 his the and in easy triumphs fellow a It of but that the not courage by his said and challenge his adversity willingness his . of serve face citizens , been value by true measured has to man is
 his courage not face a in of willingness fellow serve measured and his of by It challenge his citizens but the that is and adversity has true easy value been his . , man said triumphs the to by
 by said his the courage serve challenge that to of , his but It in been willingness citizens and of has face by adversity triumphs fellow is man easy the value not his his a true and measured .
 his willingness face easy but adversity his not in is that has the value a triumphs his serve It measured man by fellow been the of and , true said of his by . to citizens courage and challenge
 triumphs It of but the his his easy his the by true man is citizens in has and fellow said and not face of willingness to adversity his serve that measured , value courage challenge . by a been
 is serve measured been of his fellow to by man has not but his triumphs in the , It his face the value courage adversity a easy challenge that his by of and willingness citizens and . true said
 of measured a his been It and his man that . but in has adversity said his fellow willingness the courage and is value to by challenge citizens by his triumphs of the serve , easy face true not
Business of the Senate 
The Hon. the Speaker :
Honourable senators, before I call Orders of the Day, I wish to remind honourable senators that we will be taking the official photograph of the Senate tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
Canada Pension Plan Investment Board Bill 
Second Reading-Debate Continued 
On the Order: 
Resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Kirby, seconded by the Honourable Senator Joyal, P.C., for the second reading of Bill C-2, to establish the Canada Pension Plan Investment Board and to amend the Canada Pension Plan and the Old Age Security Act and to make consequential amendments to other Acts.  
Hon. David Tkachuk :
However, there are a number of important issues that we believe are relevant and important not only to this side of the house but to all senators. 
Some senators, including me, are interested in this bill from a personal point of view as well. 
This bill was brought in last week so that we could work on it. 
Now, we must complete that work and pass the bill by Christmas. 
I do not think that we are handmaidens. 
We do not have to take orders. 
We must do what is right.  
This bill has important consequences for many of us, and more particularly, for our children and our grandchildren. 
Those people who are already retired and at the age of 65 will receive all their benefits. 
For those people who are in the middle and who will soon be retiring, it is not a big problem for them. 
They will have some reduced benefits and some increased costs. 
 It has been said that the true value of a man is not measured by his easy triumphs , but by his courage in the face of challenge and adversity and his willingness to serve his fellow citizens
 a challenge but easy to his said serve his willingness the the measured . value that triumphs and is fellow and face man in his of been not by of true citizens adversity courage It by his has
 triumphs It face by to citizens courage fellow his said man . been a easy not measured the his by his and true of in the but is challenge adversity serve willingness of and his value has that
 triumphs by has a face man his willingness that said his . the value citizens not true and measured and courage but in adversity easy It been his his of challenge by to the is serve , of
Senator Landry, may all of us in this new session show the same courage and determination, and if I can use the words that you used, the same pig-headedness - the same pig-headed dedication to the interest of our communities, the same pig-headed determination to the interests of our regions - as you have shown in an all too brief tenure in this place.  
 same to as , in , of us the words interest new our interests show used you pig dedication Senator I tenure can an - to shown if Landry session of too - the brief may the pig same headed and determination the the and headedness in , all that pig courage same our headed - this same you the determination communities regions of . this use place , all have - the - in
 and if show of the use the communities courage us determination have in , - - - new session and that Landry words this regions all headed the same the of in I our headed . the dedication same the - the , tenure too you , , pig shown an interests used all can headedness Senator you in to pig of our may same brief same this as - pig interest determination to place
 - in interests same our our the regions that - you session courage Landry pig shown pig us of all can all same - , communities headed , I - determination place words - same headedness interest the new in headed Senator to this the in . pig the as and have if the of used to use same of may the , this show and an tenure dedication , determination brief the too you
 the as I pig the , this of can to determination used the pig use an dedication - of determination all - interest interests pig session - place , - our all , communities brief Senator , same headed in that the . too and in regions and headed new in if same Landry shown this show our the us the words of courage tenure the to have - you same same headedness may you
 you show determination of Landry us the have interest and in to in used headed that can too this same regions brief session this our - communities - dedication determination all pig same the all as , courage in the - place the pig headed , the our and an I , tenure if , . the of new words you Senator same pig same may of - to use headedness the shown - interests
 pig I too shown session tenure of new place in headed all this you - you , - the the , of , interest the headed to of in in same the the that and and pig all have the - determination our used same our determination dedication use pig the communities an Landry this headedness as - interests if . brief same to can regions same may show - Senator us words courage ,
 this , - - our - determination words communities in determination of pig the may same and brief have place new all headed you I of that the same to courage in same our Landry if session the used headed show regions too , dedication the use in of to interest - you headedness and pig interests all pig Senator this can - same the the the us . shown an , tenure , as
 determination in Landry headed if courage same pig you the in tenure regions use show headedness communities the the all , and as same same to same words have you the of in new our our determination - can - . pig the of , the interest pig an - headed , interests I session too this this place of - brief all to dedication used that shown may Senator - the us and ,
 and that pig the used session words the the interests - of same shown can pig as brief all , the same our dedication of us tenure same to too interest have . place this - an of Senator our , you all headed in if - pig headedness , communities courage and may determination I use new Landry you , this the the to - in same - the regions determination headed in show
 too to , the new this the same headed courage shown I the in dedication you all that - have - , can used you pig the same interests Senator of an place , our us the brief regions same the and may of in determination to interest pig tenure , - session in show if of . - use words pig as communities the determination - headedness same all this Landry headed our and
 same headed new regions show of if brief headedness dedication as - the shown - all headed place the you the , you this our interests in determination courage this I too of can our Senator have may the session of - - , same an . pig pig that to used interest the all same Landry tenure , communities determination to - and in , pig and words the use the same in us
 place can the brief this Senator the may tenure the - pig that use interest determination in words determination - - and same the as to you dedication our and the . if all interests an shown communities same to headedness - used - , all of same pig courage our in session , new same headed of pig the the in headed this of I you Landry have regions us , show too ,
 , the - all in you determination Senator the an session as to . of the place may the use - all - us same headed new - this courage , our in the show pig too pig communities the have pig interests , you headed the words to headedness this interest of Landry in and brief dedication tenure of shown same used same determination regions I if , that - our same and can
 that may headedness interest our Landry can - of in determination tenure the our use too - new I and place words headed - you same Senator interests this an determination to us this communities to and , of in you used , - , all same courage show headed the shown the in have brief the the - , as session the the of dedication same same all pig . if pig regions pig
 you pig tenure same and this - if regions - the the used interest us , an headed same of in to dedication the - , in pig show you all shown our brief can may that Senator have headed too - - use the I words Landry new same session determination all interests our place the pig this courage . , communities determination of as headedness and the of the to same in ,
 session as our same you shown the of regions of the , too - all pig , - in in to that - new the this Senator if Landry interests this our and the you use have . same same the courage can in headed of pig determination brief and us all interest to dedication , the an determination pig headedness headed , may I same the show communities place - used - tenure words
Again, I never spoke to the staff and was therefore never told any such comment. 
On my attendance, 21 % (19 out of 87 sittings), and on the statement: "He says - 
Senator Lucier has underlined the word "says."  
- he has bone cancer and must live in the British Columbia city for treatments".  
Senator Lucier replies: 
I wonder if Jack Aubry is questioning the fact that I have cancer. 
I would gladly give him permission to question my doctor as to whether I have had cancer for 10 years.  
4. I would like to have these points clarified but not in the media. 
I truly appreciate all the support I have received from my colleagues regarding this subject. 
Thanks to all of you.  
History of the Vote in Canada 
Book Launched by Governor General 
Hon. Mabel M. DeWare :
Honourable senators, yesterday, the Right Honourable Romeo LeBlanc, Governor General of Canada, launched an important new book, A History of the Vote in Canada , which recounts how the right to vote has evolved over the past 250 years. 
The book starts at the time of the first elected legislatures in what is now Canada and ends with the most recent federal election. 
It traces changes in voting eligibility, electioneering and voting practices, as well as voter turnout since Confederation. 
Extension of the vote to those who were excluded legally from the franchise, such as women, aboriginal people, religious and racial minorities, is examined in the social context of the period.  
Even though most Canadian adults were eligible to vote by 1920, there is a final chapter that looks at ways to make voting accessible to everyone, including people in all geographic locations and people with physical disabilities.  
A History of the Vote in Canada is meant to be an educational resource and a reminder to Canadians of the significance of the right to vote. 
This is in keeping with Elections Canada's 1993 mandate to educate voters about the democratic right to vote.  
 Senator Landry , may all of us in this new session show the same courage and determination , and if I can the words that you used , the same pig - headedness - the same pig - headed dedication to the interest of our communities , the same pig - headed determination to the interests of our regions - as you have shown in an all too brief tenure in this place .
 if all may the in used interests tenure the use - Senator can too and this the , the of determination headedness communities I , the to headed , headed interest - show same regions words us pig the same dedication you this all - , you - of courage brief the pig - session pig that determination have Landry of . same our our new to shown as same in an and in
 to headed regions determination that and to pig the pig new us communities and this Senator - headed the , the , place , - I dedication brief the - - all you same courage . determination if headedness as in interest this - of the show can tenure in of the of used session Landry words our shown have you same pig an , the same use too interests same may in all
 tenure the pig can same in us the if to that headedness of the in - same place our - communities you in Landry and same courage the brief to used the interests , this too headed - . interest shown Senator of new show - have , you of - , an regions and session use headed this , pig determination our as words determination pig all dedication I the same all the
We all wish you and Lucie a happy and healthy retirement.  
 wish and a happy Lucie you We healthy . retirement and all
 a Lucie you healthy and wish happy . and retirement all We
 retirement . all Lucie happy wish and a and healthy you We
 and a . Lucie wish retirement you healthy happy all We and
 retirement you happy . all and We and wish healthy Lucie a
 healthy . and a retirement happy wish We and all you Lucie
 retirement and healthy and wish . Lucie happy a We you all
 and Lucie retirement wish all . and happy healthy you We a
 retirement all happy Lucie and wish healthy you We . a and
 all you and . a healthy happy We wish Lucie and retirement
 We and Lucie wish happy all and . retirement a healthy you
 retirement you . and and all We a Lucie healthy happy wish
 wish We Lucie you and a happy healthy all retirement and .
 healthy all wish you and happy . and a We retirement Lucie
 We Lucie and healthy wish all and a you happy retirement .
 all you a Lucie and . We healthy retirement and happy wish
I shall now turn to the essence of section 93, which is called by some commentators, a "Pocket Bill of Rights." 
That is a misnomer.  
In essence, section 93 is a series of privileges rather than full rights. 
Clearly, this is not the case here. 
Section 93 has yet another substantial problem which further diminished and minimized one's ability to define the subsections as containing full rights. 
On its face, these privileges, or limited rights, pertain only to the geography of the city of Montreal and Quebec City at the date of Confederation and beyond, into the province, to the privileges or rights of dissentient Roman Catholic and Protestant denominational school boards.  
Therefore, it is so difficult for me to understand how the subsections of 93 can be considered full rights. 
They could be considered privileges for geographically defined and certain narrowly cast denominational groups.  
Notwithstanding this difficulty, I still considered we had a responsibility to examine whether these groups, said to be affected by these privileges or narrow rights or attenuated rights, agreed with their substitution - not their diminishment or removal - for the architecture of denominational access now afforded under the provisions of Quebec educational laws. 
I say "substitution" because, while the constitutional provisions were being attenuated, denominational rights had previously been incorporated in the Quebec Education Bill 109 and its predecessors leading to that bill. 
There is a clear, overwhelming consensus for citizens in the province of Quebec to maintain a form, some form, of denominational teaching within their school system architecture.  
It is equally clear that there was an overwhelming consensus with few dissents throughout every segment of Quebec for renovating the Quebec school system into two linguistic streams, two linguistic boards, English and French. 
There is no question whatsoever in my mind, based on the evidence that I heard.  
Now we come to the more difficult question confronting members of the committee - to determine if there was a "majority" of the so-called "minorities" affected or given these denominational privileges.  
Even here, we had difficulty in definition. 
Notwithstanding that, we still treated that majority as if it were a minority.  
I will not repeat Senator Stewart's questions yesterday about section 93 and its limited scope, but I commend all students of the Constitution to examine section 93 and see how even the subsections of section 93, in so far as that section pertains to the province of Quebec, are much narrower in its scope than is clearly understood or debated in this Senate chamber. 
I will not go into that aspect of this debate. 
It would take half an hour, but I would be pleased to do so privately with any senator who is interested.  
The evidence we heard was extensive, definitive and clear. 
 We all you and Lucie a happy and healthy retirement .
 all healthy and and you We happy a wish . retirement
 retirement Lucie and wish healthy all . We happy a you
 We and and healthy you retirement happy wish a . Lucie
